       *       *       *       *       *

"Say, these women here get my goat."

"How do you mean?"

"Well, I was at the Olympia with Johnson and that crowd. They just
pester the life out of you there. I'd heard that Paris was immoral, but
nothing like this."

"It's the war."

"But the Jane I went with ..."

"Gee, these Frenchwomen are immoral. They say the war does it."

"Can't be that. Nothing is more purifying than sacrifice."

"A feller has to be mighty careful, they say."

"Looks like every woman you saw walking on the street was a whore. They
certainly are good-lookers though."

"King and his gang are all being sent back to the States."

"I'll be darned! They sure have been drunk ever since they got off the
steamer."

"Raised hell in Maxim's last night. They tried to clean up the place and
the police came. They were all soused to the gills and tried to make
everybody there sing the 'Star Spangled Banner.'"

"Damn fool business."

       *       *       *       *       *

Martin Howe sat at a table on the sidewalk under the brown awning of a
restaurant. Opposite in the last topaz-clear rays of the sun, the
foliage of the Jardin du Luxembourg shone bright green above deep alleys
of bluish shadow. From the pavements in front of the mauve-coloured
houses rose little kiosks with advertisements in bright orange and
vermilion and blue. In the middle of the triangle formed by the streets
and the garden was a round pool of jade water. Martin leaned back in his
chair looking dreamily out through half-closed eyes, breathing deep now
and then of the musty scent of Paris, that mingled with the melting
freshness of the wild strawberries on the plate before him.

As he stared in front of him two figures crossed his field of vision. A
woman swathed in black crepe veils was helping a soldier to a seat at
the next table. He found himself staring in a face, a face that still
had some of the chubbiness of boyhood. Between the pale-brown frightened
eyes, where the nose should have been, was a triangular black patch that
ended in some mechanical contrivance with shiny little black metal rods
that took the place of the jaw. He could not take his eyes from the
soldier's eyes, that were like those of a hurt animal, full of meek
dismay. Someone plucked at Martin's arm, and he turned suddenly,
fearfully.

A bent old woman was offering him flowers with a jerky curtsey.

"Just a rose, for good luck?"

"No, thank you."

"It will bring you happiness."

He took a couple of the reddest of the roses.

"Do you understand the language of flowers?"

"No."

"I shall teach you.... Thank you so much.... Thank you so much."

She added a few large daisies to the red roses in his hand.

"These will bring you love.... But another time I shall teach you the
language of flowers, the language of love."

She curtseyed again, and began making her way jerkily down the sidewalk,
jingling his silver in her hand.

He stuck the roses and daisies in the belt of his uniform and sat with
the green flame of Chartreuse in a little glass before him, staring into
the gardens, where the foliage was becoming blue and lavender with
evening, and the shadows darkened to grey-purple and black. Now and then
he glanced furtively, with shame, at the man at the next table. When the
restaurant closed he wandered through the unlighted streets towards the
river, listening to the laughs and conversations that bubbled like the
sparkle in Burgundy through the purple summer night.

But wherever he looked in the comradely faces of young men, in the
beckoning eyes of women, he saw the brown hurt eyes of the soldier, and
the triangular black patch where the nose should have been.




CHAPTER III


At Epernay the station was wrecked; the corrugated tin of the roof hung
in strips over the crumbled brick walls.

"They say the Boches came over last night. They killed a lot of
permissionaires."

"That river's the Marne."

"Gosh, is it? Let me get to the winder."

The third-class car, joggling along on a flat wheel, was full of the
smell of sweat and sour wine. Outside, yellow-green and blue-green,
crossed by long processions of poplars, aflame with vermilion and
carmine of poppies, the countryside slipped by. At a station where the
train stopped on a siding, they could hear a faint hollow sound in the
distance: guns.

       *       *       *       *       *

Croix de Guerre had been given out that day at the automobile park at
Chalons. There was an unusually big dinner at the wooden tables in the
narrow portable barracks, and during the last course the General passed
through and drank a glass of champagne to the health of all present.
Everybody had on his best uniform and sweated hugely in the narrow,
airless building, from the wine and the champagne and the thick stew,
thickly seasoned, that made the dinner's main course.

"We are all one large family," said the General from the end of the
barracks ... "to France."

That night the wail of a siren woke Martin suddenly and made him sit up
in his bunk trembling, wondering where he was. Like the shriek of a
woman in a nightmare, the wail of the siren rose and rose and then
dropped in pitch and faded throbbingly out.

"Don't flash a light there. It's Boche planes."

Outside the night was cold, with a little light from a waned moon.

"See the shrapnel!" someone cried.

"The Boche has a Mercedes motor," said someone else. "You can tell by
the sound of it."

"They say one of their planes chased an ambulance ten miles along a
straight road the other day, trying to get it with a machine-gun. The
man who was driving got away, but he had shell-shock afterwards."

"Did he really?"

"Oh, I'm goin' to turn in. God, these French nights are cold!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The rain pattered hard with unfaltering determination on the roof of the
little arbour. Martin lolled over the rough board table, resting his
chin on his clasped hands, looking through the tinkling bead curtains of
the rain towards the other end of the weed-grown garden, where, under a
canvas shelter, the cooks were moving about in front of two black
steaming cauldrons. Through the fresh scent of rain-beaten leaves came a
greasy smell of soup. He was thinking of the jolly wedding-parties that
must have drunk and danced in this garden before the war, of the lovers
who must have sat in that very arbour, pressing sunburned cheek against
sunburned cheek, twining hands callous with work in the fields. A man
broke suddenly into the arbour behind Martin and stood flicking the
water off his uniform with his cap. His sand-coloured hair was wet and
was plastered in little spikes to his broad forehead, a forehead that
was the entablature of a determined rock-hewn face.

"Hello," said Martin, twisting his head to look at the newcomer. "You
section twenty-four?"

"Yes.... Ever read 'Alice in Wonderland'?" asked the wet man, sitting
down abruptly at the table.

"Yes, indeed."

"Doesn't this remind you of it?"

"What?"

"This war business. Why, I keep thinking I'm going to meet the rabbit
who put butter in his watch round every corner."

"It was the best butter."

"That's the hell of it."

"When's your section leaving here?" asked Martin, picking up the
conversation after a pause during which they'd both stared out into the
rain. They could hear almost constantly the grinding roar of camions on
the road behind the café and the slither of their wheels through the
mud-puddles where the road turned into the village.

"How the devil should I know?"

"Somebody had dope this morning that we'd leave here for Soissons
to-morrow." Martin's words tailed off into a convictionless mumble.

"It surely is different than you'd pictured it, isn't it, now?"

They sat looking at each other while the big drops from the leaky roof
smacked on the table or splashed cold in their faces.

"What do you think of all this, anyway?" said the wet man suddenly,
lowering his voice stealthily.

"I don't know. I never did expect it to be what we were taught to
believe.... Things aren't."

"But you can't have guessed that it was like this ... like Alice in
Wonderland, like an ill-intentioned Drury Lane pantomime, like all the
dusty futility of Barnum and Bailey's Circus."

"No, I thought it would be hair-raising," said Martin.

"Think, man, think of all the oceans of lies through all the ages that
must have been necessary to make this possible! Think of this new
particular vintage of lies that has been so industriously pumped out of
the press and the pulpit. Doesn't it stagger you?"

Martin nodded.

"Why, lies are like a sticky juice overspreading the world, a living,
growing flypaper to catch and gum the wings of every human soul.... And
the little helpless buzzings of honest, liberal, kindly people, aren't
they like the thin little noise flies make when they're caught?"

"I agree with you that the little thin noise is very silly," said
Martin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Martin slammed down the hood of the car and stood upright. A cold stream
of rain ran down the sleeves of his slicker and dripped from his greasy
hands.

Infantry tramped by, the rain spattering with a cold glitter on grey
helmets, on gun-barrels, on the straps of equipment. Red sweating faces,
drooping under the hard rims of helmets, turned to the ground with the
struggle with the weight of equipment; rows and patches of faces were
the only warmth in the desolation of putty-coloured mud and bowed
mud-coloured bodies and dripping mud-coloured sky. In the cold
colourlessness they were delicate and feeble as the faces of children,
rosy and soft under the splattering of mud and the shagginess of
unshaven beards.

Martin rubbed the back of his hand against his face. His skin was like
that, too, soft as the petals of flowers, soft and warm amid all this
dead mud, amid all this hard mud-covered steel.

He leant against the side of the car, his ears full of the heavy
shuffle, of the jingle of equipment, of the splashing in puddles of
water-soaked boots, and watched the endless rosy patches of faces moving
by, the faces that drooped towards the dripping boots that rose and
fell, churning into froth the soupy, putty-coloured mud of the road.

       *       *       *       *       *

The schoolmaster's garden was full of late roses and marigolds, all
parched and bleached by the thick layer of dust that was over them. Next
to the vine-covered trellis that cut the garden off from the road stood
a green table and a few cane chairs. The schoolmaster, something
charmingly eighteenth-century about the cut of his breeches and the
calves of his legs in their thick woollen golf-stockings, led the way, a
brown pitcher of wine in his hand. Martin Howe and the black-haired,
brown-faced boy from New Orleans who was his car-mate followed him. Then
came a little grey woman in a pink knitted shawl, carrying a tray with
glasses.

"In the Verdunois our wine is not very good," said the schoolmaster,
bowing them into chairs. "It is thin and cold like the climate. To your
health, gentlemen."

"To France."

"To America."

"And down with the Boches."

In the pale yellow light that came from among the dark clouds that
passed over the sky, the wine had the chilly gleam of yellow diamonds.

"Ah, you should have seen that road in 1916," said the schoolmaster,
drawing a hand over his watery blue eyes. "That, you know, is the Voie
Sacrée, the sacred way that saved Verdun. All day, all day, a double
line of camions went up, full of ammunition and ravitaillement and men."

"Oh, the poor boys, we saw so many go up," came the voice, dry as the
rustling of the wind in the vine-leaves, of the grey old woman who stood
leaning against the schoolmaster's chair, looking out through a gap in
the trellis at the rutted road so thick with dust, "and never have we
seen one of them come back."

"It was for France."

"But this was a nice village before the war. From Verdun to Bar-le-Duc,
the Courrier des Postes used to tell us, there was no such village, so
clean and with such fine orchards." The old woman leaned over the
schoolmaster's shoulder, joining eagerly in the conversation.

"Even now the fruit is very fine," said Martin.

"But you soldiers, you steal it all," said the old woman, throwing out
her arms. "You leave us nothing, nothing."

"We don't begrudge it," said the schoolmaster, "all we have is our
country's."

"We shall starve then...."

As she spoke the glasses on the table shook. With a roar of heavy wheels
and a grind of gears a camion went by.

"O good God!" The old woman looked out on to the road with terror in her
face, blinking her eyes in the thick dust.

Roaring with heavy wheels, grinding with gears, throbbing with motors,
camion after camion went by, slowly, stridently. The men packed into the
camions had broken through the canvas covers and leaned out, waving
their arms and shouting.

"Oh, the poor children," said the old woman, wringing her hands, her
voice lost in the roar and the shouting.

"They should not destroy property that way," said the schoolmaster....
"Last year it was dreadful. There were mutinies."

Martin sat, his chair tilted back, his hands trembling, staring with
compressed lips at the men who jolted by on the strident, throbbing
camions. A word formed in his mind: tumbrils.

In some trucks the men were drunk and singing, waving their bidons in
the air, shouting at people along the road, crying out all sorts of
things: "Get to the front!" "Into the trenches with them!" "Down with
the war!" In others they sat quiet, faces corpse-like with dust. Through
the gap in the trellis Martin stared at them, noting intelligent faces,
beautiful faces, faces brutally gay, miserable faces like those of
sobbing drunkards.

At last the convoy passed and the dust settled again on the rutted road.

"Oh, the poor children!" said the old woman. "They know they are going
to death."

They tried to hide their agitation. The schoolmaster poured out more
wine.

"Yes," said Martin, "there are fine orchards on the hills round here."

"You should be here when the plums are ripe," said the schoolmaster.

A tall bearded man, covered with dust to the eyelashes, in the uniform
of a commandant, stepped into the garden.

"My dear friends!" He shook hands with the schoolmaster and the old
woman and saluted the two Americans. "I could not pass without stopping
a moment. We are going up to an attack. We have the honour to take the
lead."

"You will have a glass of wine, won't you?"

"With great pleasure."

"Julie, fetch a bottle, you know which.... How is the morale?"

"Perfect."

"I thought they looked a little discontented."

"No.... It's always like that.... They were yelling at some gendarmes.
If they strung up a couple it would serve them right, dirty beasts."

"You soldiers are all one against the gendarmes."

"Yes. We fight the enemy but we hate the gendarmes." The commandant
rubbed his hands, drank his wine and laughed.

"Hah! There's the next convoy. I must go."

"Good luck."

The commandant shrugged his shoulders, clicked his heels together at the
garden gate, saluted, smiling, and was gone.

Again the village street was full of the grinding roar and throb of
camions, full of a frenzy of wheels and drunken shouting.

"Give us a drink, you."

"We're the train de luxe, we are."

"Down with the war!"

And the old grey woman wrung her hands and said:

"Oh, the poor children, they know they are going to death!"




CHAPTER IV


Martin, rolled up in his bedroll on the floor of the empty hayloft, woke
with a start.

"Say, Howe!" Tom Randolph, who lay next him, was pressing his hand. "I
think I heard a shell go over."

As he spoke there came a shrill, loudening whine, and an explosion that
shook the barn. A little dirt fell down on Martin's face.

"Say, fellers, that was damn near," came a voice from the floor of the
barn.

"We'd better go over to the quarry."

"Oh, hell, I was sound asleep!"

A vicious shriek overhead and a shaking snort of explosion.

"Gee, that was in the house behind us...."

"I smell gas."

"Ye damn fool, it's carbide."

"One of the Frenchmen said it was gas."

"All right, fellers, put on your masks."

Outside there was a sickly rough smell in the air that mingled strangely
with the perfume of the cool night, musical with the gurgling of the
stream through the little valley where their barn was. They crouched in
a quarry by the roadside, a straggling, half-naked group, and watched
the flashes in the sky northward, where artillery along the lines kept
up a continuous hammering drumbeat. Over their heads shells shrieked at
two-minute intervals, to explode with a rattling ripping sound in the
village on the other side of the valley.

"Damn foolishness," muttered Tom Randolph in his rich Southern voice.
"Why don't those damn gunners go to sleep and let us go to sleep?...
They must be tired like we are."

A shell burst in a house on the crest of the hill opposite, so that they
saw the flash against the starry night sky. In the silence that
followed, the moaning shriek of a man came faintly across the valley.

       *       *       *       *       *

Martin sat on the steps of the dugout, looking up the shattered shaft of
a tree, from the top of which a few ribbons of bark fluttered against
the mauve evening sky. In the quiet he could hear the voices of men
chatting in the dark below him, and a sound of someone whistling as he
worked. Now and then, like some ungainly bird, a high calibre shell
trundled through the air overhead; after its noise had completely died
away would come the thud of the explosion. It was like battledore and
shuttlecock, these huge masses whirling through the evening far above
his head, now from one side, now from the other. It gave him somehow a
cosy feeling of safety, as if he were under some sort of a bridge over
which freight-cars were shunted madly to and fro.

The doctor in charge of the post came up and sat beside Martin. He was a
small brown man with slim black moustaches that curved like the horns of
a long-horn steer. He stood on tip-toe on the top step and peered about
in every direction with an air of ownership, then sat down again and
began talking briskly.

"We are exactly four hundred and five mètres from the Boche.... Five
hundred mètres from here they are drinking beer and saying, 'Hoch der
Kaiser.'"

"About as much as we're saying 'Vive la République', I should say."

"Who knows? But it is quiet here, isn't it? It's quieter here than in
Paris."

"The sky is very beautiful to-night."

"They say they're shelling the Etat-Major to-day. Damned embusqués;
it'll do them good to get a bit of their own medicine."

Martin did not answer. He was crossing in his mind the four hundred and
five mètres to the first Boche listening-post. Next beyond the abris was
the latrine from which a puff of wind brought now and then a nauseous
stench. Then there was the tin roof, crumpled as if by a hand, that had
been a cook shack. That was just behind the second line trenches that
zig-zagged in and out of great abscesses of wet, upturned clay along the
crest of a little hill. The other day he had been there, and had
clambered up the oily clay where the boyau had caved in, and from the
level of the ground had looked for an anxious minute or two at the
tangle of trenches and pitted gangrened soil in the direction of the
German outposts. And all along these random gashes in the mucky clay
were men, feet and legs huge from clotting after clotting of clay, men
with greyish-green faces scarred by lines of strain and fear and boredom
as the hillside was scarred out of all semblance by the trenches and the
shell-holes.

"We are well off here," said the doctor again. "I have not had a serious
case all day."

"Up in the front line there's a place where they've planted rhubarb....
You know, where the hillside is beginning to get rocky."

"It was the Boche who did that.... We took that slope from them two
months ago.... How does it grow?"

"They say the gas makes the leaves shrivel," said Martin, laughing.

He looked long at the little ranks of clouds that had begun to fill the
sky, like ruffles on a woman's dress. Might not it really be, he kept
asking himself, that the sky was a beneficent goddess who would stoop
gently out of the infinite spaces and lift him to her breast, where he
could lie amid the amber-fringed ruffles of cloud and look curiously
down at the spinning ball of the earth? It might have beauty if he were
far enough away to clear his nostrils of the stench of pain.

"It is funny," said the little doctor suddenly, "to think how much
nearer we are, in state of mind, in everything, to the Germans than to
anyone else."

"You mean that the soldiers in the trenches are all further from the
people at home than from each other, no matter what side they are on."

The little doctor nodded.

"God, it's so stupid! Why can't we go over and talk to them? Nobody's
fighting about anything.... God, it's so hideously stupid!" cried
Martin, suddenly carried away, helpless in the flood of his passionate
revolt.

"Life is stupid," said the little doctor sententiously.

Suddenly from the lines came a splutter of machine-guns.

"Evensong!" cried the little doctor. "Ah, but here's business. You'd
better get your car ready, my friend."

The brancardiers set the stretcher down at the top of the steps that led
to the door of the dugout, so that Martin found himself looking into the
lean, sensitive face, stained a little with blood about the mouth, of
the wounded man. His eyes followed along the shapeless bundles of
blood-flecked uniform till they suddenly turned away. Where the middle
of the man had been, where had been the curved belly and the genitals,
where the thighs had joined with a strong swerving of muscles to the
trunk, was a depression, a hollow pool of blood, that glinted a little
in the cold diffusion of grey light from the west.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rain beat hard on the window-panes of the little room and hissed
down the chimney into the smouldering fire that sent up thick green
smoke. At a plain oak table before the fireplace sat Martin Howe and Tom
Randolph, Tom Randolph with his sunburned hands with their dirty nails
spread flat and his head resting on the table between them, so that
Martin could see the stiff black hair on top of his head and the dark
nape of his neck going into shadow under the collar of the flannel
shirt.

"Oh, God, it's too damned absurd! An arrangement for mutual suicide and
no damned other thing," said Randolph, raising his head.

"A certain jolly asinine grotesqueness, though. I mean, if you were God
and could look at it like that ... Oh, Randy, why do they enjoy hatred
so?"

"A question of taste ... as the lady said when she kissed the cow."

"But it isn't. It isn't natural for people to hate that way, it can't
be. It even disgusts the perfectly stupid damn-fool people, like
Higgins, who believes that the Bible was written in God's own
handwriting and that the newspapers tell the truth."

"It makes me sick at ma stomach, Howe, to talk to one of those
hun-hatin' women, if they're male or female."

"It is a stupid affair, _la vie_, as the doctor at P.1. said
yesterday...."

"Hell, yes...."

They sat silent, watching the rain beat on the window, and run down in
sparkling finger-like streams.

"What I can't get over is these Frenchwomen." Randolph threw back his
head and laughed. "They're so bloody frank. Did I tell you about what
happened to me at that last village on the Verdun road?"

"No."

"I was lyin' down for a nap under a plum-tree, a wonderfully nice place
near a li'l brook an' all, an' suddenly that crazy Jane ... You know the
one that used to throw stones at us out of that broken-down house at the
corner of the road.... Anyway, she comes up to me with a funny look in
her eyes an' starts makin' love to me. I had a regular wrastlin' match
gettin' away from her."

"Funny position for you to be in, getting away from a woman."

"But doesn't that strike you funny? Why down where I come from a drunken
mulatto woman wouldn't act like that. They all keep up a fake of not
wantin' your attentions." His black eyes sparkled, and he laughed his
deep ringing laugh, that made the withered woman smile as she set an
omelette before them.

"Voilà, messieurs," she said with a grand air, as if it were a boar's
head that she was serving.

Three French infantrymen came into the café, shaking the rain off their
shoulders.

"Nothing to drink but champagne at four francs fifty," shouted Howe.
"Dirty night out, isn't it?"

"We'll drink that, then!"

Howe and Randolph moved up and they all sat at the same table.

"Fortune of war?"

"Oh, the war, what do you think of the war?" cried Martin.

"What do you think of the peste? You think about saving your skin."

"What's amusing about us is that we three have all saved our skins
together," said one of the Frenchmen.

"Yes. We are of the same class," said another, holding up his thumb.
"Mobilised same day." He held up his first finger. "Same company." He
held up a second finger. "Wounded by the same shell.... Evacuated to the
same hospital. Convalescence at same time.... Réformé to the same depôt
behind the lines."

"Didn't all marry the same girl, did you, to make it complete?" asked
Randolph.

They all shouted with laughter until the glasses along the bar rang.

"You must be Athos, Porthos, and d'Artagnan."

"We are," they shouted.

"Some more champagne, madame, for the three musketeers," sang Randolph
in a sort of operatic yodle.

"All I have left is this," said the withered woman, setting a bottle
down on the table.

"Is that poison?"

"It's cognac, it's very good cognac," said the old woman seriously.

"C'est du cognac! Vive le roi cognac!" everybody shouted.

    "_Au plein de mon cognac
     Qu'il fait bon, fait bon, fait bon,
     Au plein de mon cognac
     Qu'il fait bon dormir._"

"Down with the war! Who can sing the 'Internationale'?"

"Not so much noise, I beg you, gentlemen," came the withered woman's
whining voice. "It's after hours. Last week I was fined. Next time I'll
be closed up."

The night was black when Martin and Randolph, after lengthy and
elaborate farewells, started down the muddy road towards the hospital.
They staggered along the slippery footpath beside the road, splashed
every instant with mud by camions, huge and dark, that roared grindingly
by. They ran and skipped arm-in-arm and shouted at the top of their
lungs:

    "_Auprès de ma blonde,
     Qu'il fait bon, fait bon, fait bon,
     Auprès de ma blonde,
     Qu'il fait bon dormir._"

A stench of sweat and filth and formaldehyde caught them by the throat
as they went into the hospital tent, gave them a sense of feverish
bodies of men stretched all about them, stirring in pain.

       *       *       *       *       *

"A car for la Bassée, Ambulance 4," said the orderly.

Howe got himself up off the hospital stretcher, shoving his flannel
shirt back into his breeches, put on his coat and belt and felt his way
to the door, stumbling over the legs of sleeping brancardiers as he
went. Men swore in their sleep and turned over heavily. At the door he
waited a minute, then shouted:

"Coming, Tom?"

"Too damn sleepy," came Randolph's voice from under a blanket.

"I've got cigarettes, Tom. I'll smoke 'em all up if you don't come."

"All right, I'll come."

"Less noise, name of God!" cried a man, sitting up on his stretcher.

After the hospital, smelling of chloride and blankets and reeking
clothes, the night air was unbelievably sweet. Like a gilt fringe on a
dark shawl, a little band of brightness had appeared in the east.

"Some dawn, Howe, ain't it?"

As they were going off, their motor chugging regularly, an orderly said:

"It's a special case. Go for orders to the commandant."

Colours formed gradually out of chaotic grey as the day brightened. At
the dressing-station an attendant ran up to the car.

"Oh, you're for the special case? Have you anything to tie a man with?"

"No, why?"

"It's nothing. He just tried to stab the sergeant-major."

The attendant raised a fist and tapped on his head as if knocking on a
door. "It's nothing. He's quieter now."

"What caused it?"

"Who knows? There is so much.... He says he must kill everyone...."

"Are you ready?"

A lieutenant of the medical corps came to the door and looked out. He
smiled reassuringly at Martin Howe. "He's not violent any more. And
we'll send two guardians."

A sergeant came out with a little packet which he handed to Martin.

"That's his. Will you give it to them at the hospital at Fourreaux? And
here's his knife. They can give it back to him when he gets better. He
has an idea he ought to kill everyone he sees.... Funny idea."

The sun had risen and shone gold across the broad rolling lands, so that
the hedges and the poplar-rows cast long blue shadows over the fields.
The man, with a guardian on either side of him who cast nervous glances
to the right and to the left, came placidly, eyes straight in front of
him, out of the dark interior of the dressing-station. He was a small
man with moustaches and small, good-natured lips puffed into an o-shape.
At the car he turned and saluted.

"Good-bye, my lieutenant. Thank you for your kindness," he said.

"Good-bye, old chap," said the lieutenant.

The little man stood up in the car, looking about him anxiously.

"I've lost my knife. Where's my knife?"

The guards got in behind him with a nervous, sheepish air. They answered
reassuringly, "The driver's got it. The American's got it."

"Good."

The orderly jumped on the seat with the two Americans to show the way.
He whispered in Martin's ear:

"He's crazy. He says that to stop the war you must kill everybody, kill
everybody."

       *       *       *       *       *

In an open valley that sloped between hills covered with beech-woods,
stood the tall abbey, a Gothic nave and apse with beautifully traced
windows, with the ruin of a very ancient chapel on one side, and
crossing the back, a well-proportioned Renaissance building that had
been a dormitory. The first time that Martin saw the abbey, it towered
in ghostly perfection above a low veil of mist that made the valley seem
a lake in the shining moonlight. The lines were perfectly quiet, and
when he stopped the motor of his ambulance, he could hear the wind
rustling among the beech-woods. Except for the dirty smell of huddled
soldiers that came now and then in drifts along with the cool
wood-scents, there might have been no war at all. In the soft moonlight
the great traceried windows and the buttresses and the high-pitched roof
seemed as gorgeously untroubled by decay as if the carvings on the cusps
and arches had just come from under the careful chisels of the Gothic
workmen.

"And you say we've progressed," he whispered to Tom Randolph.

"God, it is fine."

They wandered up and down the road a long time, silently, looking at the
tall apse of the abbey, breathing the cool night air, moist with mist,
in which now and then was the huddled, troubling smell of soldiers. At
last the moon, huge and swollen with gold, set behind the wooded hills,
and they went back to the car, where they rolled up in their blankets
and went to sleep.

Behind the square lantern that rose over the crossing, there was a trap
door in the broken tile roof, from which you could climb to the
observation post in the lantern. Here, half on the roof and half on the
platform behind the trap-door, Martin would spend the long summer
afternoons when there was no call for the ambulance, looking at the
Gothic windows of the lantern and the blue sky beyond, where huge soft
clouds passed slowly over, darkening the green of the woods and of the
weed-grown fields of the valley with their moving shadows.

There was almost no activity on that part of the front. A couple of
times a day a few snapping discharges would come from the seventy-fives
of the battery behind the Abbey, and the woods would resound like a
shaken harp as the shells passed over to explode on the crest of the
hill that blocked the end of the valley where the Boches were.

Martin would sit and dream of the quiet lives the monks must have passed
in their beautiful abbey so far away in the Forest of the Argonne,
digging and planting in the rich lands of the valley, making flowers
bloom in the garden, of which traces remained in the huge beds of
sunflowers and orange marigolds that bloomed along the walls of the
dormitory. In a room in the top of the house he had found a few torn
remnants of books; there must have been a library in the old days, rows
and rows of musty-smelling volumes in rich brown calf worn by use to a
velvet softness, and in cream-coloured parchment where the finger-marks
of generations showed brown; huge psalters with notes and chants
illuminated in green and ultramarine and gold; manuscripts out of the
Middle Ages with strange script and pictures in pure vivid colours;
lives of saints, thoughts polished by years of quiet meditation of old
divines; old romances of chivalry; tales of blood and death and love
where the crude agony of life was seen through a dawn-like mist of
gentle beauty.

"God! if there were somewhere nowadays where you could flee from all
this stupidity, from all this cant of governments, and this hideous
reiteration of hatred, this strangling hatred ..." he would say to
himself, and see himself working in the fields, copying parchments in
quaint letterings, drowsing his feverish desires to calm in the
deep-throated passionate chanting of the endless offices of the Church.

One afternoon towards evening as he lay on the tiled roof with his shirt
open so that the sun warmed his throat and chest, half asleep in the
beauty of the building and of the woods and the clouds that drifted
overhead, he heard a strain from the organ in the church: a few deep
notes in broken rhythm that filled him with wonder, as if he had
suddenly been transported back to the quiet days of the monks. The
rhythm changed in an instant, and through the squeakiness of shattered
pipes came a swirl of fake-oriental ragtime that resounded like mocking
laughter in the old vaults and arches. He went down into the church and
found Tom Randolph playing on the little organ, pumping desperately with
his feet.

"Hello! Impiety I call it; putting your lustful tunes into that pious
old organ."

"I bet the ole monks had a merry time, lecherous ole devils," said Tom,
playing away.

"If there were monasteries nowadays," said Martin, "I think I'd go into
one."

"But there are. I'll end up in one, most like, if they don't put me in
jail first. I reckon every living soul would be a candidate for either
one if it'd get them out of this God-damned war."

There was a shriek overhead that reverberated strangely in the vaults of
the church and made the swallows nesting there fly in and out through
the glassless windows. Tom Randolph stopped on a wild chord.

"Guess they don't like me playin'."

"That one didn't explode though."

"That one did, by gorry," said Randolph, getting up off the floor, where
he had thrown himself automatically. A shower of tiles came rattling off
the roof, and through the noise could be heard the frightened squeaking
of the swallows.

"I am afraid that winged somebody."

"They must have got wind of the ammunition dump in the cellar."

"Hell of a place to put a dressing-station--over an ammunition dump!"

The whitewashed room used as a dressing-station had a smell of blood
stronger than the chloride. A doctor was leaning over a stretcher on
which Martin caught a glimpse of two naked legs with flecks of blood on
the white skin, as he passed through on his way to the car.

"Three stretcher-cases for Les Islettes. Very softly," said the
attendant, handing him the papers.

Jolting over the shell-pitted road, the car wound slowly through
unploughed weed-grown fields. At every jolt came a rasping groan from
the wounded men.

As they came back towards the front posts again, they found all the
batteries along the road firing. The air was a chaos of explosions that
jabbed viciously into their ears, above the reassuring purr of the
motor. Nearly to the abbey a soldier stopped them.

"Put the car behind the trees and get into a dugout. They're shelling
the abbey."

As he spoke a whining shriek grew suddenly loud over their heads. The
soldier threw himself flat in the muddy road. The explosion brought
gravel about their ears and made a curious smell of almonds.

Crowded in the door of the dugout in the hill opposite they watched the
abbey as shell after shell tore through the roof or exploded in the
strong buttresses of the apse. Dust rose high above the roof and filled
the air with an odour of damp tiles and plaster. The woods resounded in
a jangling tremor, with the batteries that started firing one after the
other.

"God, I hate them for that!" said Randolph between his teeth.

"What do you want? It's an observation post."

"I know, but damn it!"

There was a series of explosions; a shell fragment whizzed past their
heads.

"It's not safe there. You'd better come in all the way," someone shouted
from within the dugout.

"I want to see; damn it.... I'm goin' to stay and see it out, Howe. That
place meant a hell of a lot to me." Randolph blushed as he spoke.

Another bunch of shells crashing so near together they did not hear the
scream. When the cloud of dust blew away, they saw that the lantern had
fallen in on the roof of the apse, leaving only one wall and the tracery
of a window, of which the shattered carving stood out cream-white
against the reddish evening sky.

There was a lull in the firing. A few swallows still wheeled about the
walls, giving shrill little cries.

They saw the flash of a shell against the sky as it exploded in the part
of the tall roof that still remained. The roof crumpled and fell in, and
again dust hid the abbey.

"Oh, I hate this!" said Tom Randolph. "But the question is, what's
happened to our grub? The popote is buried four feet deep in Gothic
art.... Damn fool idea, putting a dressing-station over an ammunition
dump."

"Is the car hit?" The orderly came up to them.

"Don't think so."

"Good. Four stretcher-cases for 42 at once."

       *       *       *       *       *

At night in a dugout. Five men playing cards about a lamp-flame that
blows from one side to the other in the gusty wind that puffs every now
and then down the mouth of the dugout and whirls round it like something
alive trying to beat a way out.

Each time the lamp blows the shadows of the five heads writhe upon the
corrugated tin ceiling. In the distance, like kettle-drums beaten for a
dance, a constant reverberation of guns.

Martin Howe, stretched out in the straw of one of the bunks, watches
their faces in the flickering shadows. He wishes he had the patience to
play too. No, perhaps it is better to look on; it would be so silly to
be killed in the middle of one of those grand gestures one makes in
slamming the card down that takes the trick. Suddenly he thinks of all
the lives that must, in these last three years, have ended in that grand
gesture. It is too silly. He seems to see their poor lacerated souls,
clutching their greasy dog-eared cards, climb to a squalid Valhalla, and
there, in tobacco-stinking, sweat-stinking rooms, like those of the
little cafés behind the lines, sit in groups of five, shuffling,
dealing, taking tricks, always with the same slam of the cards on the
table, pausing now and then to scratch their louse-eaten flesh.

At this moment, how many men, in all the long Golgotha that stretches
from Belfort to the sea, must be trying to cheat their boredom and their
misery with that grand gesture of slamming the cards down to take a
trick, while in their ears, like tom-toms, pounds the death-dance of the
guns.

Martin lies on his back looking up at the curved corrugated ceiling of
the dugout, where the shadows of the five heads writhe in fantastic
shapes. Is it death they are playing, that they are so merry when they
take a trick?




CHAPTER V


The three planes gleamed like mica in the intense blue of the sky. Round
about the shrapnel burst in little puffs like cotton-wool. A shout went
up from the soldiers who stood in groups in the street of the ruined
town. A whistle split the air, followed by a rending snort that tailed
off into the moaning of a wounded man.

"By damn, they're nervy. They dropped a bomb."

"I should say they did."

"The dirty bastards, to get a fellow who's going on permission. Now if
they beaded you on the way back you wouldn't care."

In the sky an escadrille of French planes had appeared and the three
German specks had vanished, followed by a trail of little puffs of
shrapnel. The indigo dome of the afternoon sky was full of a distant
snoring of motors.

The train screamed outside the station and the permissionaires ran for
the platform, their packed musettes bouncing at their hips.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dark boulevards, with here and there a blue lamp lighting up a bench
and a few tree-trunks, or a faint glow from inside a closed café where a
boy in shirt-sleeves is sweeping the floor. Crowds of soldiers,
Belgians, Americans, Canadians, civilians with canes and straw hats and
well-dressed women on their arms, shop-girls in twos and threes laughing
with shrill, merry voices; and everywhere girls of the street, giggling
alluringly in hoarse, dissipated tones, clutching the arms of drunken
soldiers, tilting themselves temptingly in men's way as they walk along.
Cigarettes and cigars make spots of reddish light, and now and then a
match lighted makes a man's face stand out in yellow relief and glints
red in the eyes of people round about.

Drunk with their freedom, with the jangle of voices, with the rustle of
trees in the faint light, with the scents of women's hair and cheap
perfumes, Howe and Randolph stroll along slowly, down one side to the
shadowy columns of the Madeleine, where a few flower-women still offer
roses, scenting the darkness, then back again past the Opéra towards the
Porte St. Martin, lingering to look in the offered faces of women, to
listen to snatches of talk, to chatter laughingly with girls who squeeze
their arms with impatience.

"I'm goin' to find the prettiest girl in Paris, and then you'll see the
dust fly, Howe, old man."

       *       *       *       *       *

The hors d'oeuvre came on a circular three-tiered stand; red strips of
herrings and silver anchovies, salads where green peas and bits of
carrot lurked under golden layers of sauce, sliced tomatoes, potato
salad green-specked with parsley, hard-boiled eggs barely visible under
thickness of vermilion-tinged dressing, olives, radishes, discs of
sausage of many different forms and colours, complicated bundles of
spiced salt fish, and, forming the apex, a fat terra-cotta jar of paté
de foie gras. Howe poured out pale-coloured Chablis.

"I used to think that down home was the only place they knew how to
live, but oh, boy ..." said Tom Randolph, breaking a little loaf of
bread that made a merry crackling sound.

"It's worth starving to death on singe and pinard for four months."

After the hors d'oeuvre had been taken away, leaving them
Rabelaisianly gay, with a joyous sense of orgy, came sole hidden in a
cream-coloured sauce with mussels in it.

"After the war, Howe, ole man, let's riot all over Europe; I'm getting a
taste for this sort of livin'."

"You can play the fiddle, can't you, Tom?"

"Enough to scrape out _Auprès de ma blonde_ on a bet."

"Then we'll wander about and you can support me.... Or else I'll dress
as a monkey and you can fiddle and I'll gather the pennies."

"By gum, that'd be great sport."

"Look, we must have some red wine with the veal."

"Let's have Macon."

"All the same to me as long as there's plenty of it."

Their round table with its white cloth and its bottles of wine and its
piles of ravished artichoke leaves was the centre of a noisy, fantastic
world. Ever since the orgy of the hors d'oeuvres things had been
evolving to grotesqueness, faces, whites of eyes, twisted red of lips,
crow-like forms of waiters, colours of hats and uniforms, all involved
and jumbled in the mélee of talk and clink and clatter.

The red hand of the waiter pouring the Chartreuse, green like a stormy
sunset, into small glasses before them broke into the vivid imaginings
that had been unfolding in their talk through dinner. No, they had been
saying, it could not go on; some day amid the rending crash of shells
and the whine of shrapnel fragments, people everywhere, in all uniforms,
in trenches, packed in camions, in stretchers, in hospitals, crowded
behind guns, involved in telephone apparatus, generals at their
dinner-tables, colonels sipping liqueurs, majors developing photographs,
would jump to their feet and burst out laughing at the solemn inanity,
at the stupid, vicious pomposity of what they were doing. Laughter would
untune the sky. It would be a new progress of Bacchus. Drunk with
laughter at the sudden vision of the silliness of the world, officers
and soldiers, prisoners working on the roads, deserters being driven
towards the trenches would throw down their guns and their spades and
their heavy packs, and start marching, or driving in artillery waggons
or in camions, staff cars, private trains, towards their capitals, where
they would laugh the deputies, the senators, the congressmen, the M.P.'s
out of their chairs, laugh the presidents and the prime ministers, and
kaisers and dictators out of their plush-carpeted offices; the sun would
wear a broad grin and would whisper the joke to the moon, who would
giggle and ripple with it all night long.... The red hand of the waiter,
with thick nails and work-swollen knuckles, poured Chartreuse into the
small glasses before them.

"That," said Tom Randolph, when he had half finished his liqueur, "is
the girl for me."

"But, Tom, she's with a French officer."

"They're fighting like cats and dogs. You can see that, can't you?"

"Yes," agreed Howe vaguely.

"Pay the bill. I'll meet you at the corner of the boulevard." Tom
Randolph was out of the door. The girl, who had a little of the aspect
of a pierrot, with dark skin and bright lips and gold-yellow hat and
dress, and the sour-looking officer who was with her, were getting up to
go.

At the corner of the Boulevard Howe heard a woman's voice joining with
Randolph's rich laugh.

"What did I tell you? They split at the door and here we are, Howe....
Mademoiselle Montreil, let me introduce a friend. Look, before it's too
late, we must have a drink."

At the café table next them an Englishman was seated with his head sunk
on his chest.

"Oh, I say, you woke me up."

"Sorry."

"No harm. Jolly good thing."

They invited him over to their table. There was a moist look about his
eyes and a thickness to his voice that denoted alcohol.

"You mustn't mind me. I'm forgetting.... I've been doing it for a week.
This is the first leave I've had in eighteen months. You Canadians?"

"No. Ambulance service; Americans."

"New at the game then. You're lucky.... Before I left the front I saw a
man tuck a hand-grenade under the pillow of a poor devil of a German
prisoner. The prisoner said, 'Thank you.' The grenade blew him to hell!
God! Know anywhere you can get whisky in this bloody town?"

"We'll have to hurry; it's near closing-time."

"Right-o."

They started off, Randolph and the girl talking intimately, their heads
close together, Martin supporting the Englishman.

"I need a bit o' whisky to put me on my pins."

They tumbled into the seats round a table at an American bar.

The Englishman felt in his pocket.

"Oh, I say," he cried, "I've got a ticket to the theatre. It's a box....
We can all get in. Come along; let's hurry."

They walked a long while, blundering through the dark streets, and at
last stopped at a blue-lighted door.

"Here it is; push in."

"But there are two gentlemen and a lady already in the box, meester."

"No matter, there'll be room." The Englishman waved the ticket in the
air.

The little round man with a round red face who was taking the tickets
stuttered in bad English and then dropped into French. Meanwhile, the
whole party had filed in, leaving the Englishman, who kept waving the
ticket in the little man's face.

Two gendarmes, the theatre guards, came up menacingly; the Englishman's
face wreathed itself in smiles; he linked an arm in each of the
gendarmes', and pushed them towards the bar.

"Come drink to the Entente Cordiale.... Vive la France!"

In the box were two Australians and a woman who leaned her head on the
chest of one and then the other alternately, laughing so that you could
see the gold caps in her black teeth.

They were annoyed at the intrusion that packed the box insupportably
tight, so that the woman had to sit on the men's laps, but the air soon
cleared in laughter that caused people in the orchestra to stare angrily
at the box full of noisy men in khaki. At last the Englishman came,
squeezing himself in with a finger mysteriously on his lips. He plucked
at Martin's arm, a serious set look coming suddenly over his grey eyes.
"It was like this"--his breath laden with whisky was like a halo round
Martin's head--"the Hun was a nice little chap, couldn't 'a' been more
than eighteen; had a shoulder broken and he thought that my pal was
fixing the pillow. He said 'Thank you' with a funny German accent....
Mind you, he said 'Thank you'; that's what hurt. And the man laughed.
God damn him, he laughed when the poor devil said 'Thank you.' And the
grenade blew him to hell."

The stage was a glare of light in Martin's eyes; he felt as he had when
at home he had leaned over and looked straight into the headlight of an
auto drawn up to the side of the road. Screening him from the glare were
the backs of people's heads: Tom Randolph's head and his girl's, side by
side, their cheeks touching, the pointed red chin of one of the
Australians and the frizzy hair of the other woman.

In the entr'acte they all stood at the bar, where it was very hot and an
orchestra was playing and there were many men in khaki in all stages of
drunkenness, being led about by women who threw jokes at each other
behind the men's backs.

"Here's to mud," said one of the Australians. "The war'll end when
everybody is drowned in mud."

The orchestra began playing the _Madelon_ and everyone roared out the
marching song that, worn threadbare as it was, still had a roistering
verve to it that caught people's blood.

People had gone back for the last act. The two Australians, the
Englishman, and the two Americans still stood talking.

"Mind you, I'm not what you'd call susceptible. I'm not soft. I got over
all that long ago." The Englishman was addressing the company in
general. "But the poor beggar said 'Thank you.'"

"What's he saying?" asked a woman, plucking at Martin's arm.

"He's telling about a German atrocity."

"Oh, the dirty Germans! What things they've done!" the woman answered
mechanically.

Somehow, during the entr'acte, the Australians had collected another
woman; and a strange fat woman with lips painted very small, and very
large bulging eyes, had attached herself to Martin. He suffered her
because every time he looked at her she burst out laughing.

The bar was closing. They had a drink of champagne all round that made
the fat woman give little shrieks of delight. They drifted towards the
door, and stood, a formless, irresolute group, in the dark street in
front of the theatre.

Randolph came up to Martin.

"Look. We're goin'. I wonder if I ought to leave my money with you ..."

"I doubt if I'm a safe person to-night ..."

"All right. I'll take it along. Look ... let's meet for breakfast."

"At the _Café de la Paix_."

"All right. If she is nice I'll bring her."

"She looks charming."

Tom Randolph pressed Martin's hand and was off. There was a sound of a
kiss in the darkness.

"I say, I've got to have something to eat," said the Englishman. "I
didn't have a bit of dinner. I say--mangai, mangai." He made gestures of
putting things into his mouth in the direction of the fat woman.

The three women put their heads together. One of them knew a place, but
it was a dreadful place. Really, they mustn't think that ... She only
knew it because when she was very young a man had taken her there who
wanted to seduce her.

At that everyone laughed and the voices of the women rose shrill.

"All right, don't talk; let's go there," said one of the Australians.
"We'll attend to the seducing."

A thick woman, a tall comb in the back of her high-piled black hair, and
an immovable face with jaw muscled like a prize-fighter's, served them
with cold chicken and ham and champagne in a room with mouldering
greenish wall-paper lighted by a red-shaded lamp.

The Australians ate and sang and made love to their women. The
Englishman went to sleep with his head on the table.

Martin leaned back out of the circle of light, keeping up a desultory
conversation with the woman beside him, listening to the sounds of the
men's voices down corridors, of the front door being opened and slammed
again and again, and of forced, shrill giggles of women.

"Unfortunately, I have an engagement to-night," said Martin to the woman
beside him, whose large spherical breasts heaved as she talked, and who
rolled herself nearer to him invitingly, seeming with her round pop-eyes
and her round cheeks to be made up entirely of small spheres and large
soft ones.

"Oh, but it is too late. You can break it."

"It's at four o'clock."

"Then we have time, ducky."

"It's something really romantic, you see."

"The young are always lucky." She rolled her eyes in sympathetic
admiration. "This will be the fourth night this week that I have not
made a sou.... I'll chuck myself into the river soon."

Martin felt himself softening towards her. He slipped a twenty-franc
note in her hand.

"Oh, you are too good. You are really galant homme, you."

Martin buried his face in his hands, dreaming of the woman he would like
to love to-night. She should be very dark, with red lips and stained
cheeks, like Randolph's girl; she should have small breasts and slender,
dark, dancer's thighs, and in her arms he could forget everything but
the madness and the mystery and the intricate life of Paris about them.
He thought of Montmartre, and Louise in the opera standing at her window
singing the madness of Paris....

One of the Australians had gone away with a little woman in a pink
negligée. The other Australian and the Englishman were standing
unsteadily near the table, each supported by a sleepy-looking girl.
Leaving the fat woman sadly finishing the remains of the chicken, large
tears rolling from her eyes, they left the house and walked for a long
time down dark streets, three men and two women, the Englishman being
supported in the middle, singing in a desultory fashion.

They stopped under a broken sign of black letters on greyish glass,
within which one feeble electric light bulb made a red glow. The
pavement was wet, and glimmered where it slanted up to the lamp-post at
the next corner.

"Here we are. Come along, Janey," cried the Australian in a brisk voice.

The door opened and slammed again. Martin and the other girl stood on
the pavement facing each other. The Englishman collapsed on the
doorstep, and began to snore.

"Well, there's only you and me," she said.

"Oh, if you were only a person, instead of being a member of a
profession----" said Martin softly.

"Come," she said.

"No, dearie. I must go," said Martin.

"As you will. I'll take care of your friend." She yawned.

He kissed her and strode down the dark street, his nostrils full of the
smell of the rouge on her lips.

He walked a long while with his hat off, breathing deep of the sharp
night air. The streets were black and silent. Intemperate desires
prowled like cats in the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

He woke up and stretched himself stiffly, smelling grass and damp earth.
A pearly lavender mist was all about him, through which loomed the
square towers of Notre Dame and the row of kings across the façade and
the sculpture about the darkness of the doorways. He had lain down on
his back on the little grass plot of the Parvis Notre Dame to look at
the stars, and had fallen asleep.

It must be nearly dawn. Words were droning importunately in his head.
"The poor beggar said 'Thank you' with a funny German accent and the
grenade blew him to hell." He remembered the man he had once helped to
pick up in whose pocket a grenade had exploded. Before that he had not
realised that torn flesh was such a black-red, like sausage meat.

"Get up, you can't lie there," cried a gendarme.

"Notre Dame is beautiful in the morning," said Martin, stepping across
the low rail on to the pavement.

"Ah, yes; it is beautiful."

Martin Howe sat on the rail of the bridge and looked. Before him, with
nothing distinct yet to be seen, were two square towers and the tracery
between them and the row of kings on the façade, and the long series of
flying buttresses of the flank, gleaming through the mist, and, barely
visible, the dark, slender spire soaring above the crossing. So had the
abbey in the forest gleamed tall in the misty moonlight; like mist, only
drab and dense, the dust had risen above the tall apse as the shells
tore it to pieces.

       *       *       *       *       *

Amid a smell of new-roasted coffee he sat at a table and watched people
pass briskly through the ruddy sunlight. Waiters in shirt-sleeves were
rubbing off the other tables and putting out the chairs. He sat sipping
coffee, feeling languid and nerveless. After a while Tom Randolph,
looking very young and brown with his hat a little on one side, came
along. With him, plainly dressed in blue serge, was the girl. They sat
down and she dropped her head on his shoulder, covering her eyes with
her dark lashes.

"Oh, I am so tired."

"Poor child! You must go home and go back to bed."

"But I've got to go to work."

"Poor thing." They kissed each other tenderly and languidly.

The waiter came with coffee and hot milk and little crisp loaves of
bread.

"Oh, Paris is wonderful in the early morning!" said Martin.

"Indeed it is.... Good-bye, little girl, if you must go. We'll see each
other again."

"You must call me Yvonne." She pouted a little.

"All right, Yvonne." He got to his feet and pressed her two hands.

"Well, what sort of a time did you have, Howe?"

"Curious. I lost our friends one by one, left two women and slept a
little while on the grass in front of Notre Dame. That was my real love
of the night."

"My girl was charming.... Honestly, I'd marry her in a minute." He
laughed a merry laugh.

"Let's take a cab somewhere."

They climbed into a victoria and told the driver to go to the Madeleine.

"Look, before I do anything else I must go to the hotel."

"Why?"

"Preventives."

"Of course; you'd better go at once."

The cab rattled merrily along the streets where the early sunshine cast
rusty patches on the grey houses and on the thronged fantastic
chimney-pots that rose in clusters and hedges from the mansard roofs.




CHAPTER VI

The lamp in the hut of the road control casts an oblong of light on the
white wall opposite. The patch of light is constantly crossed and
scalloped and obscured by shadows of rifles and helmets and packs of men
passing. Now and then the shadow of a single man, a nose and a chin
under a helmet, a head bent forward with the weight of the pack, or a
pack alone beside which slants a rifle, shows up huge and fantastic with
its loaf of bread and its pair of shoes and its pots and pans.

Then with a jingle of harness and clank of steel, train after train of
artillery comes up out of the darkness of the road, is thrown by the
lamp into vivid relief and is swallowed again by the blackness of the
village street, short bodies of seventy-fives sticking like ducks' tails
from between their large wheels; caisson after caisson of ammunition,
huge waggons hooded and unhooded, filled with a chaos of equipment that
catches fantastic lights and throws huge muddled shadows on the white
wall of the house.

"Put that light out. Name of God, do you want to have them start
chucking shells into here?" comes a voice shrill with anger. The brisk
trot of the officer's horse is lost in the clangour.

The door of the hut slams to and only a thin ray of orange light
penetrates into the blackness of the road, where with jingle of harness
and clatter of iron and tramp of hoofs, gun after gun, caisson after
caisson, waggon after waggon files by. Now and then the passing stops
entirely and matches flare where men light pipes and cigarettes. Coming
from the other direction with throbbing of motors, a convoy of camions,
huge black oblongs, grinds down the other side of the road. Horses rear
and there are shouts and curses and clacking of reins in the darkness.

Far away where the lowering clouds meet the hills beyond the village a
white glare grows and fades again at intervals: star-shells.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There's a most tremendous concentration of sanitary sections."

"You bet; two American sections and a French one in this village; three
more down the road. Something's up."

"There's goin' to be an attack at St. Mihiel, a Frenchman told me."

"I heard that the Germans were concentrating for an offensive in the
Four de Paris."

"Damned unlikely."

"Anyway, this is the third week we've been in this bloody hole with our
feet in the mud."

"They've got us quartered in a barn with a regular brook flowing through
the middle of it."

"The main thing about this damned war is ennui--just plain boredom."

"Not forgetting the mud."

Three ambulance drivers in slickers were on the front seat of a car. The
rain fell in perpendicular sheets, pattering on the roof of the car and
on the puddles that filled the village street. Streaming with water,
blackened walls of ruined houses rose opposite them above a rank growth
of weeds. Beyond were rain-veiled hills. Every little while, slithering
through the rain, splashing mud to the right and left, a convoy of
camions went by and disappeared, truck after truck, in the white
streaming rain.

Inside the car Tom Randolph was playing an accordion, letting strange
nostalgic little songs filter out amid the hard patter of the rain.

    "_Oh, I's been workin' on de railroad
       All de livelong day;
     I's been workin' on de railroad
       Jus' to pass de time away._"

The men on the front seat leaned back and shook the water off their
knees and hummed the song.

The accordion had stopped. Tom Randolph was lying on his back on the
floor of the car with his arm over his eyes. The rain fell endlessly,
rattling on the roof of the car, dancing silver in the coffee-coloured
puddles of the road. Their boredom fell into the rhythm of crooning
self-pity of the old coon song:

    "_I's been workin' on de railroad
       All de livelong day;
     I's been workin' on de railroad
       Jus' to pass de time away._"

"Oh, God, something's got to happen soon."

Lost in rubber boots, and a huge gleaming slicker and hood, the section
leader splashed across the road.

"All cars must be ready to leave at six to-night."

"Yay. Where we goin'?"

"Orders haven't come yet. We're to be in readiness to leave at six
to-night...."

"I tell you, fellers, there's goin' to be an attack. This concentration
of sanitary sections means something. You can't tell me ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

"They say they have beer," said the aspirant behind Martin in the long
line of men who waited in the hot sun for the copé to open, while the
dust the staff cars and camions raised as they whirred by on the road
settled in a blanket over the village.

"Cold beer?"

"Of course not," said the aspirant, laughing so that all the brilliant
ivory teeth showed behind his red lips. "It'll be detestable. I'm
getting it because it's rare, for sentimental reasons."

Martin laughed, looking in the man's brown face, a face in which all
past expressions seemed to linger in the fine lines about the mouth and
eyes and in the modelling of the cheeks and temples.

"You don't understand that," said the aspirant again.

"Indeed I do."

Later they sat on the edge of the stone wellhead in the courtyard behind
the store, drinking warm beer out of tin cups blackened by wine, and
staring at a tall barn that had crumpled at one end so that it looked,
with its two frightened little square windows, like a cow kneeling down.

"Is it true that the ninety-second's going up to the lines to-night?"

"Yes, we're going up to make a little attack. Probably I'll come back in
your little omnibus."

"I hope you won't."

"I'd be very glad to. A lucky wound! But I'll probably be killed. This
is the first time I've gone up to the front that I didn't expect to be
killed. So it'll probably happen."

Martin Howe could not help looking at him suddenly. The aspirant sat at
ease on the stone margin of the well, leaning against the wrought iron
support for the bucket, one knee clasped in his strong, heavily-veined
hands. Dead he would be different. Martin's mind could hardly grasp the
connection between this man full of latent energies, full of thoughts
and desires, this man whose shoulder he would have liked to have put his
arm round from friendliness, with whom he would have liked to go for
long walks, with whom he would have liked to sit long into the night
drinking and talking--and those huddled, pulpy masses of blue uniform
half-buried in the mud of ditches.

"Have you ever seen a herd of cattle being driven to abattoir on a fine
May morning?" asked the aspirant in a scornful, jaunty tone, as if he
had guessed Martin's thoughts.

"I wonder what they think of it."

"It's not that I'm resigned.... Don't think that. Resignation is too
easy. That's why the herd can be driven by a boy of six ... or a prime
minister!"

Martin was sitting with his arms crossed. The fingers of one hand were
squeezing the muscle of his forearm. It gave him pleasure to feel the
smooth, firm modelling of his arm through his sleeve. And how would that
feel when it was dead, when a steel splinter had slithered through it? A
momentary stench of putrefaction filled his nostrils, making his stomach
contract with nausea.

"I'm not resigned either," he shouted in a laugh. "I am going to do
something some day, but first I must see. I want to be initiated in all
the circles of hell."

"I'd play the part of Virgil pretty well," said the aspirant, "but I
suppose Virgil was a staff officer."

"I must go," said Martin. "My name's Martin Howe, S.S.U. 84."

"Oh yes, you are quartered in the square. My name is Merrier. You'll
probably carry me back in your little omnibus."

       *       *       *       *       *

When Howe got back to where the cars were packed in a row in the village
square, Randolph came up to him and whispered in his ear:

"D.J.'s to-morrow."

"What's that?"

"The attack. It's to-morrow at three in the morning; instructions are
going to be given out to-night."

A detonation behind them was like a blow on the head, making their
ear-drums ring. The glass in the headlight of one of the cars tinkled to
the ground.

"The 410 behind the church, that was. Pretty near knocks the wind out of
you."

"Say, Randolph, have you heard the new orders?"

"No."

A tall, fair-haired man came out from the front of his car where he had
been working on the motor, holding his grease-covered hands away from
him.

"It's put off," he said, lowering his voice mysteriously. "D.J.'s not
till day after to-morrow at four-twenty. But to-morrow we're going up to
relieve the section that's coming out and take over the posts. They say
it's hell up there. The Germans have a new gas that you can't smell at
all. The other section's got about five men gassed, and a bunch of them
have broken down. The posts are shelled all the time."

"Great," said Tom Randolph. "We'll see the real thing this time."

There was a whistling shriek overhead and all three of them fell in a
heap on the ground in front of the car. There was a crash that echoed
amid the house-walls, and a pillar of black smoke stood like a cypress
tree at the other end of the village street.

"Talk about the real thing!" said Martin.

"Ole 410 evidently woke 'em up some."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the fifth time that day that Martin's car had passed the
cross-roads where the calvary was. Someone had propped up the fallen
crucifix so that it tilted dark despairing arms against the sunset sky
where the sun gleamed like a huge copper kettle lost in its own steam.
The rain made bright yellowish stripes across the sky and dripped from
the cracked feet of the old wooden Christ, whose gaunt, scarred figure
hung out from the tilted cross, swaying a little under the beating of
the rain. Martin was wiping the mud from his hands after changing a
wheel. He stared curiously at the fallen jowl and the cavernous eyes
that had meant for some country sculptor ages ago the utterest agony of
pain. Suddenly he noticed that where the crown of thorns had been about
the forehead of the Christ someone had wound barbed wire. He smiled, and
asked the swaying figure in his mind:

"And You, what do You think of it?"

For an instant he could feel wire barbs ripping through his own flesh.

He leaned over to crank the car.

The road was filled suddenly with the tramp and splash of troops
marching, their wet helmets and their rifles gleaming in the coppery
sunset. Even through the clean rain came the smell of filth and sweat
and misery of troops marching. The faces under the helmets were strained
and colourless and cadaverous from the weight of the equipment on their
necks and their backs and their thighs. The faces drooped under the
helmets, tilted to one side or the other, distorted and wooden like the
face of the figure that dangled from the cross.

Above the splash of feet through mud and the jingle of equipment, came
occasionally the ping, ping of shrapnel bursting at the next cross-roads
at the edge of the woods.

Martin sat in the car with the motor racing, waiting for the end of the
column.

One of the stragglers who floundered along through the churned mud of
the road after the regular ranks had passed stopped still and looked up
at the tilted cross. From the next cross-roads came, at intervals, the
sharp twanging ping of shrapnel bursting.

The straggler suddenly began kicking feebly at the prop of the cross
with his foot, and then dragged himself off after the column. The cross
fell forward with a dull splintering splash into the mud of the road.

       *       *       *       *       *

The road went down the hill in long zig-zags, through a village at the
bottom where out of the mist that steamed from the little river a spire
with a bent weathercock rose above the broken roof of the church, then
up the hill again into the woods. In the woods the road stretched green
and gold in the first horizontal sunlight. Among the thick trees, roofs
covered with branches, were rows of long portable barracks with doors
decorated with rustic work. At one place a sign announced in letters
made of wattled sticks, _Camp des Pommiers_.

A few birds sang in the woods, and at a pump they passed a lot of men
stripped to the waist who were leaning over washing, laughing and
splashing in the sunlight. Every now and then, distant, metallic, the
pong, pong, pong of a battery of seventy-fives resounded through the
rustling trees.

"Looks like a camp meetin' ground in Georgia," said Tom Randolph,
blowing his whistle to make two men carrying a large steaming pot on a
pole between them get out of the way.

The road became muddier as they went deeper into the woods, and, turning
into a cross-road, the car began slithering, skidding a little at the
turns, through thick soupy mud. On either side the woods became broken
and jagged, stumps and split boughs littering the ground, trees snapped
off halfway up. In the air there was a scent of newly-split timber and
of turned-up woodland earth, and among them a sweetish rough smell.

Covered with greenish mud, splashing the mud right and left with their
great flat wheels, camions began passing them returning from the
direction of the lines.

At last at a small red cross flag they stopped and ran the car into a
grove of tall chestnuts, where they parked it beside another car of
their section and lay down among the crisp leaves, listening to
occasional shells whining far overhead. All through the wood was a
continuous ping, pong, ping of batteries, with the crash of a big gun
coming now and then like the growl of a bull-frog among the sing-song of
small toads in a pond at night.

Through the trees from where they lay they could see the close-packed
wooden crosses of a cemetery from which came a sound of spaded earth,
and where, preceded by a priest in a muddy cassock, little two-wheeled
carts piled with shapeless things in sacks kept being brought up and
unloaded and dragged away again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Showing alternately dark and light in the sun and shadow of the woodland
road, a cook waggon, short chimney giving out blue smoke, and cauldrons
steaming, clatters ahead of Martin and Randolph; the backs of two men in
heavy blue coats, their helmets showing above the narrow driver's seat.
On either side of the road short yellow flames keep spitting up,
slanting from hidden guns amid a pandemonium of noise.

Up the road a sudden column of black smoke rises among falling trees. A
louder explosion and the cook waggon in front of them vanishes in a new
whirl of thick smoke. Accelerator pressed down, the car plunges along
the rutted road, tips, and a wheel sinks in the new shell-hole. The hind
wheels spin for a moment, spattering gravel about, and just as another
roar comes behind them, bite into the road again and the car goes on,
speeding through the alternate sun and shadow of the woods. Martin
remembers the beating legs of a mule rolling on its back on the side of
the road and, steaming in the fresh morning air, the purple and yellow
and red of its ripped belly.

"Did you get the smell of almonds? I sort of like it," says Randolph,
drawing a long breath as the car slowed down again.

       *       *       *       *       *

The woods at night, fantastic blackness full of noise and yellow leaping
flames from the mouths of guns. Now and then the sulphurous flash of a
shell explosion and the sound of trees falling and shell fragments
swishing through the air. At intervals over a little knoll in the
direction of the trenches, a white star-shell falls slowly, making the
trees and the guns among their tangle of hiding branches cast long
green-black shadows, drowning the wood in a strange glare of desolation.

"Where the devil's the abri?"

Everything drowned in the detonations of three guns, one after the
other, so near as to puff hot air in their faces in the midst of the
blinding concussion.

"Look, Tom, this is foolish; the abri's right here."

"I haven't got it in my pocket, Howe. Damn those guns."

Again everything is crushed in the concussion of the guns.

They throw themselves on the ground as a shell shrieks and explodes.
There is a moment's pause, and gravel and bits of bark tumble about
their heads.

"We've got to find that abri. I wish I hadn't lost my flashlight."

"Here it is! No, that stinks too much. Must be the latrine."

"Say, Tom."

"Here."

"Damn, I ran into a tree. I found it."

"All right. Coming."

Martin held out his hand until Randolph bumped into it; then they
stumbled together down the rough wooden steps, pulled aside the blanket
that served to keep the light in, and found themselves blinking in the
low tunnel of the abri.

Brancardiers were asleep in the two tiers of bunks that filled up the
sides, and at the table at the end a lieutenant of the medical corps was
writing by the light of a smoky lamp.

"They are landing some round here to-night," he said, pointing out two
unoccupied bunks. "I'll call you when we need a car."

As he spoke, in succession the three big guns went off. The concussion
put the lamp out.

"Damn," said Tom Randolph.

The lieutenant swore and struck a match.

"The red light of the poste de secours is out, too," said Martin.

"No use lighting it again with those unholy mortars.... It's idiotic to
put a poste de secours in the middle of a battery like this."

The Americans lay down to try to sleep. Shell after shell exploded round
the dugout, but regularly every few minutes came the hammer blows of the
mortars, half the time putting the light out.

A shell explosion seemed to split the dugout and a piece of éclat
whizzed through the blanket that curtained off the door. Someone tried
to pick it up as it lay half-buried in the board floor, and pulled his
fingers away quickly, blowing on them. The men turned over in the bunks
and laughed, and a smile came over the drawn green face of a wounded man
who sat very quiet behind the lieutenant, staring at the smoky flame of
the lamp.

The curtain was pulled aside and a man staggered in holding with the
other hand a limp arm twisted in a mud-covered sleeve, from which blood
and mud dripped on to the floor.

"Hello, old chap," said the doctor quietly. A smell of disinfectant
stole through the dugout.

Faint above the incessant throbbing of explosions, the sound of a claxon
horn.

"Ha, gas," said the doctor. "Put on your masks, children." A man went
along the dugout waking those who were asleep and giving out fresh
masks. Someone stood in the doorway blowing a shrill whistle, then there
was again the clamour of a claxon near at hand.

The band of the gas mask was tight about Martin's forehead, biting into
the skin.

He and Randolph sat side by side on the edge of the bunk, looking out
through the crinkled isinglass eyepieces at the men in the dugout, most
of whom had gone to sleep again.

"God, I envy a man who can snore through a gas-mask," said Randolph.

Men's heads had a ghoulish look, strange large eyes and grey oilcloth
flaps instead of faces.

Outside the constant explosions had given place to a series of swishing
whistles, merging together into a sound as of water falling, only less
regular, more sibilant. Occasionally there was the rending burst of a
shell, and at intervals came the swinging detonations of the three guns.
In the dugout, except for two men who snored loudly, raspingly, everyone
was quiet.

Several stretchers with wounded men on them were brought in and laid in
the end of the dugout.

Gradually, as the bombardment continued, men began sliding into the
dugout, crowding together, touching each other for company, speaking in
low voices through their masks.

"A mask, in the name of God, a mask!" a voice shouted, breaking into a
squeal, and an unshaven man, with mud caked in his hair and beard, burst
through the curtain. His eyelids kept up a continual trembling and the
water streamed down both sides of his nose.

"O God," he kept talking in a rasping whisper, "O God, they're all
killed. There were six mules on my waggon and a shell killed them all
and threw me into the ditch. You can't find the road any more. They're
all killed."

An orderly was wiping his face as if it were a child's.

"They're all killed and I lost my mask.... O God, this gas ..."

The doctor, a short man, looking like a gnome in his mask with its
wheezing rubber nosepiece, was walking up and down with short, slow
steps.

Suddenly, as three soldiers came in, drawing the curtain aside, he
shouted in a shrill, high-pitched voice:

"Keep the curtain closed! Do you want to asphyxiate us?"

He strode up to the newcomers, his voice strident like an angry woman's.
"What are you doing here? This is the poste de secours. Are you
wounded?"

"But, my lieutenant, we can't stay outside ..."

"Where's your own cantonment? You can't stay here; you can't stay here,"
he shrieked.

"But, my lieutenant, our dugout's been hit."

"You can't stay here. You can't stay here. There's not enough room for
the wounded. Name of God!"

"But, my lieutenant ..."

"Get the hell out of here, d'you hear?"

The men began stumbling out into the darkness, tightening the
adjustments of their masks behind their heads.

The guns had stopped firing. There was nothing but the constant swishing
and whistling of gas-shells, like endless pails of dirty water being
thrown on gravel.

"We've been at it three hours," whispered Martin to Tom Randolph.

"God, suppose these masks need changing."

The sweat from Martin's face steamed in the eyepieces, blinding him.

"Any more masks?" he asked.

A brancardier handed him one. "There aren't any more in the abri."

"I have some more in the car," said Martin.

"I'll get one," cried Randolph, getting to his feet.

They started out of the door together. In the light that streamed out as
they drew the flap aside they saw a tree opposite them. A shell
exploded, it seemed, right on top of them; the tree rose and bowed
towards them and fell.

"Are you all there, Tom?" whispered Martin, his ears ringing.

"Bet your life."

Someone pulled them back into the abri. "Here; we've found another."

Martin lay down on the bunk again, drawing with difficulty each breath.
His lips had a wet, decomposed feeling.

At the wrist of the arm he rested his head on, the watch ticked
comfortably.

He began to think how ridiculous it would be if he, Martin Howe, should
be extinguished like this. The gas-mask might be defective.

God, it would be silly.

Outside the gas-shells were still coming in. The lamp showed through a
faint bluish haze. Everyone was still waiting.

Another hour.

Martin began to recite to himself the only thing he could remember, over
and over again in time to the ticking of his watch.

   "_Ah, sunflower, weary of time.
     Ah, sunflower, weary of time,
     Who countest the steps of the sun;
     Ah, sunflower, weary of time,
     Who countest ..._"

"One, two, three, four," he counted the shells outside exploding at
irregular intervals.

There were periods of absolute silence, when he could hear batteries
pong, pong, pong in the distance.

He began again.

    "_Ah, sunflower, weary of time,
       Who countest the steps of the sun
     In search of that far golden clime
       Where the traveller's journey is done._

   "_Where the youth pined away with desire
       And the pale virgin shrouded in snow
     Arise from their graves and aspire
       Where my sunflower wishes to go._"

Whang, whang, whang; the battery alongside began again, sending out the
light. Someone pulled the blanket aside. A little leprous greyness
filtered into the dugout.

"Ah, it's getting light."

The doctor went out and they could hear his steps climbing up to the
level of the ground.

Howe saw a man take his mask off and spit.

"Oh, God, a cigarette!" Tom Randolph cried, pulling his mask off. The
air of the woods was fresh and cool outside. Everything was lost in mist
that filled the shell-holes as with water and wreathed itself
fantastically about the shattered trunks of trees. Here and there was
still a little greenish haze of gas. It cut their throats and made their
eyes run as they breathed in the cool air of the dawn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dawn in a wilderness of jagged stumps and ploughed earth; against the
yellow sky, the yellow glare of guns that squat like toads in a tangle
of wire and piles of brass shell-cases and split wooden boxes. Long
rutted roads littered with shell-cases stretching through the wrecked
woods in the yellow light; strung alongside of them, tangled masses of
telephone wires. Torn camouflage fluttering greenish-grey against the
ardent yellow sky, and twining among the fantastic black leafless trees,
the greenish wraiths of gas. Along the roads camions overturned, dead
mules tangled in their traces beside shattered caissons, huddled bodies
in long blue coats half buried in the mud of the ditches.

"We've got to pass.... We've got five very bad cases."

"Impossible."

"We've got to pass.... Sacred name of God!"

"But it is impossible. Two camions are blocked across the road and there
are three batteries of seventy-fives waiting to get up the road."

Long lines of men on horseback with gas-masks on, a rearing of
frightened horses and jingle of harness.

"Talk to 'em, Howe, for God's sake; we've got to get past."

"I'm doing the best I can, Tom."

"Well, make 'em look lively. Damn this gas!"

"Put your masks on again; you can't breathe without them in this
hollow."

"Hay! ye God-damn sons of bitches, get out of the way."

"But they can't."

"Oh, hell, I'll go talk to 'em. You take the wheel."

"No, sit still and don't get excited."

"You're the one's getting excited."

"Damn this gas."

"My lieutenant, I beg you to move the horses to the side of the road. I
have five very badly wounded men. They will die in this gas. I've got to
get by."

"God damn him, tell him to hurry."

"Shut up, Tom, for God's sake."

"They're moving. I can't see a thing in this mask."

"Hah, that did for the two back horses."

"Halt! Is there any room in the ambulance? One of my men's just got his
thigh ripped up."

"No room, no room."

"He'll have to go to a poste de secours."

The fresh air blowing hard in their faces and the woods getting greener
on either side, full of ferns and small plants that half cover the
strands of barbed wire and the rows of shells.

At the end of the woods the sun rises golden into a cloudless sky, and
on the grassy slope of the valley sheep and a herd of little donkeys are
feeding, looking up with quietly moving jaws as the ambulance, smelling
of blood and filthy sweat-soaked clothes, rattles by.

       *       *       *       *       *

Black night. All through the woods along the road squatting mortars spit
yellow flame. Constant throbbing of detonations.

Martin, inside the ambulance, is holding together a broken stretcher,
while the car jolts slowly along. It is pitch dark in the car, except
when the glare of a gun from near the road gives him a momentary view of
the man's head, a mass of bandages from the middle of which a little bit
of blood-soaked beard sticks out, and of his lean body tossing on the
stretcher with every jolt of the car. Martin is kneeling on the floor of
the car, his knees bruised by the jolting, holding the man on the
stretcher, with his chest pressed on the man's chest and one arm
stretched down to keep the limp bandaged leg still.

The man's breath comes with a bubbling sound, now and then mingling with
an articulate groan.

"Softly.... Oh, softly, oh--oh--oh!"

"Slow as you can, Tom, old man," Martin calls out above the pandemonium
of firing on both sides of the road, tightening the muscles of his arm
in a desperate effort to keep the limp leg from bouncing. The smell of
blood and filth is misery in his nostrils.

"Softly.... Softly.... Oh--oh--oh!" The groan is barely heard amid the
bubbling breath.

Pitch dark in the car. Martin, his every muscle taut with the agony of
the man's pain, is on his knees, pressing his chest on the man's chest,
trying with an arm stretched along the man's leg to keep him from
bouncing in the broken stretcher.

"Needn't have troubled to have brought him," said the hospital orderly,
as blood dripped fast from the stretcher, black in the light of the
lantern. "He's pretty near dead now. He won't last long."




CHAPTER VII


"So you like it, Will? You like this sort of thing?"

Martin Howe was stretched on the grass of a hillside a little above a
cross-roads. Beside him squatted a ruddy-faced youth with a smudge of
grease on his faintly-hooked nose. A champagne bottle rested against his
knees.

"Yes. I've never been happier in my life. It's a coarse boozing sort of
a life, but I like it."

They looked over the landscape of greyish rolling hills scarred
everywhere by new roads and ranks of wooden shacks. Along the road
beneath them crawled like beetles convoy after convoy of motor-trucks.
The wind came to them full of a stench of latrines and of the exhaust of
motors.

"The last time I saw you," said Martin, after a pause, "was early one
morning on the Cambridge bridge. I was walking out from Boston, and we
talked of the Eroica they'd played at the Symphony, and you said it was
silly to have a great musician try to play soldier. D'you remember?"

"No. That was in another incarnation. Have some fizz."

He poured from the bottle into a battered tin cup.

"But talking about playing soldier, Howe, I must tell you about how our
lieutenant got the Croix de Guerre.... Somebody ought to write a book
called _Heroisms of the Great War_...."

"I am sure that many people have, and will. You probably'll do it
yourself, Will. But go on."

The sun burst from the huddled clouds for a moment, mottling the hills
and the scarred valleys with light. The shadow of an aeroplane flying
low passed across the field, and the snoring of its motors cut out all
other sound.

"Well, our louie's name's Duval, but he spells it with a small 'd' and a
big 'V.' He's been wanting a Croix de Guerre for a hell of a time
because lots of fellows in the section have been getting 'em. He tried
giving dinners to the General Staff and everything, but that didn't seem
to work. So there was nothing to it but to get wounded. So he took to
going to the front posts; but the trouble was that it was a hell of a
quiet sector and no shells ever came within a mile of it. At last
somebody made a mistake and a little Austrian eighty-eight came tumbling
in and popped about fifty yards from his staff car. He showed the most
marvellous presence of mind, 'cause he clapped his hand over his eye and
sank back in the seat with a groan. The doctor asked what was the
matter, but old Duval just kept his hand tight over his eye and said,
'Nothing, nothing; just a scratch,' and went off to inspect the posts.
Of course the posts didn't need inspecting. And he rode round all day
with a handkerchief over one eye and a look of heroism in the other. But
never would he let the doctor even peep at it. Next morning he came out
with a bandage round his head as big as a sheik's turban. He went to see
headquarters in that get-up and lunched with the staff-officers. Well,
he got his Croix de Guerre all right--cited for assuring the evacuation
of the wounded under fire and all the rest of it."

"Some bird. He'll probably get to be a general before the war's over."

Howe poured out the last of the champagne, and threw the bottle
listlessly off into the grass, where it struck an empty shell-case and
broke.

"But, Will, you can't like this," he said. "It's all so like an
ash-heap, a huge garbage-dump of men and equipment."

"I suppose it is ..." said the ruddy-faced youth, discovering the grease
on his nose and rubbing it off with the back of his hand. "Damn those
dirty Fords. They get grease all over you! I suppose it is that life was
so dull in America that anything seems better. I worked a year in an
office before leaving home. Give me the garbage-dump."

"Look," said Martin, shading his eyes with his hand and staring straight
up into the sky. "There are two planes fighting."

They both screwed up their eyes to stare into the sky, where two bits of
mica were circling. Below them, like wads of cotton-wool, some white and
others black, were rows of the smoke-puffs of shrapnel from
anti-aircraft guns.

The two boys watched the specks in silence. At last one began to grow
larger, seemed to be falling in wide spirals. The other had vanished.
The falling aeroplane started rising again into the middle sky, then
stopped suddenly, burst into flames, and fluttered down behind the
hills, leaving an irregular trail of smoke.

"More garbage," said the ruddy-faced youth, as he rose to his feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Shrapnel. What a funny place to shoot shrapnel!"

"They must have got the bead on that bunch of material the genie's
bringing in."

There was an explosion and a vicious whine of shrapnel bullets among the
trees. On the road a staff-car turned round hastily and speeded back.

Martin got up from where he was lying on the grass under a pine tree,
looking at the sky, and put his helmet on; as he did so there was
another sharp bang overhead and a little reddish-brown cloud that
suddenly spread and drifted away among the quiet tree-tops. He took off
his helmet and examined it quizzically.

"Tom, I've got a dent in the helmet."

Tom Randolph made a grab for the little piece of jagged iron that had
rebounded from the helmet and lay at his feet.

"God damn, it's hot," he cried, dropping it; "anyway, finding's
keepings." He put his foot on the shrapnel splinter.

"That ought to be mine, I swear, Tom."

"You've got the dent, Howe; what more do you want?"

"Damn hog."

Martin sat on the top step of the dugout, diving down whenever he heard
a shell-shriek loudening in the distance. Beside him was a tall man with
the crossed cannon of the artillery in his helmet, and a shrunken brown
face with crimson-veined cheeks and very long silky black moustaches.

"A dirty business," he said. "It's idiotic.... Name of a dog!"

Grabbing each other's arms, they tumbled down the steps together as a
shell passed overhead to burst in a tree down the road.

"Now look at that." The man held up his musette to Howe. "I've broken
the bottle of Bordeaux I had in my musette. It's idiotic."

"Been on permission?"

"Don't I look it?"

They sat at the top of the steps again; the man took out bits of wet
glass dripping red wine from his little bag, swearing all the while.

"I was bringing it to the little captain. He's a nice little old chap,
the little captain, and he loves good wine."

"Bordeaux?"

"Can't you smell it? It's Medoc, 1900, from my own vines.... Look, taste
it, there's still a little." He held up the neck of the bottle and
Martin took a sip.

The artilleryman drank the rest of it, twisted his long moustaches and
heaved a deep sigh.

"Go there, my poor good old wine." He threw the remnants of the bottle
into the underbrush. Shrapnel burst a little down the road. "Oh, this is
a dirty business! I am a Gascon.... I like to live." He put a dirty
brown hand on Martin's arm.

"How old do you think I am?"

"Thirty-five."

"I am twenty-four. Look at the picture." From a tattered black note-book
held together by an elastic band he pulled a snapshot of a jolly-looking
young man with a fleshy face and his hands tucked into the top of a
wide, tightly-wound sash. He looked at the picture, smiling and tugging
at one of his long moustaches. "Then I was twenty. It's the war." He
shrugged his shoulders and put the picture carefully back into his
inside pocket. "Oh, it's idiotic!"

"You must have had a tough time."

"It's just that people aren't meant for this sort of thing," said the
artilleryman quietly. "You don't get accustomed. The more you see the
worse it is. Then you end by going crazy. Oh, it's idiotic!"

"How did you find things at home?"

"Oh, at home! Oh, what do I care about that now? They get on without
you.... But we used to know how to live, we Gascons. We worked so hard
on the vines and on the fruit-trees, and we kept a horse and carriage. I
had the best-looking rig in the department. Sunday it was fun; we'd play
bowls and I'd ride about with my wife. Oh, she was nice in those days!
She was young and fat and laughed all the time. She was something a man
could put his arms around, she was. We'd go out in my rig. It was
click-clack of the whip in the air and off we were in the broad road....
Sacred name of a pig, that one was close.... And the Marquis of
Montmarieul had a rig, too, but not so good as mine, and my horse would
always pass his in the road. Oh, it was funny, and he'd look so sour to
have common people like us pass him in the road.... Boom, there's
another.... And the Marquis now is nicely embusqué in the automobile
service. He is stationed at Versailles.... And look at me.... But what
do I care about all that now?"

"But after the war ..."

"After the war?" He spat savagely on the first step of the dugout. "They
learn to get on without you."

"But we'll be free to do as we please."

"We'll never forget."

"I shall go to Spain ..." A piece of shrapnel ripped past Martin's ear,
cutting off the sentence.

"Name of God! It's getting hot.... Spain: I know Spain." The
artilleryman jumped up and began dancing, Spanish fashion, snapping his
fingers, his big moustaches swaying and trembling. Several shells burst
down the road in quick succession, filling the air with a whine of
fragments.

"A cook waggon got it!" the artilleryman shouted, dancing on. "Tra-la la
la-la-la-la, la-la la," he sang, snapping his fingers.

He stopped and spat again.

"What do I care?" he said. "Well, so long, old chap. I must go.... Say,
let's change knives--a little souvenir."

"Great."

"Good luck."

The artilleryman strode off through the woods, past the portable fence
that surrounded the huddled wooden crosses of the graveyard.

       *       *       *       *       *

Against the red glare of the dawn the wilderness of shattered trees
stands out purple, hidden by grey mist in the hollows, looped and draped
fantastically with strands of telephone wire and barbed wire, tangled
like leafless creepers, that hang in clots against the red sky. Here and
there guns squat among piles of shells covered with mottled green
cheese-cloth, and spit long tongues of yellow flame against the sky. The
ambulance waits by the side of the rutted road littered with tin cans
and brass shell-cases, while a doctor and two stretcher-bearers bend
over a man on a stretcher laid among the underbrush. The man groans and
there is a sound of ripping bandages. On the other side of the road a
fallen mule feebly wags its head from side to side, a mass of purple
froth hanging from its mouth and wide-stretched scarlet nostrils.

There is a new smell in the wind, a smell unutterably sordid, like the
smell of the poor immigrants landing at Ellis Island. Martin Howe
glances round and sees advancing down the road ranks and ranks of
strange grey men whose mushroom-shaped helmets give an eerie look as of
men from the moon in a fairy tale.

"Why, they're Germans," he says to himself; "I'd quite forgotten they
existed."

"Ah, they're prisoners." The doctor gets to his feet and glances down
the road and then turns to his work again.

The tramp of feet marching in unison on the rough shell-pitted road, and
piles and piles of grey men clotted with dried mud, from whom comes the
new smell, the sordid, miserable smell of the enemy.

"Things going well?" Martin asks a guard, a man with ashen face and eyes
that burn out of black sockets.

"How should I know?"

"Many prisoners?"

"How should I know?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The captain and the aumonier are taking their breakfast, each sitting on
a packing-box with their tin cups and tin plates ranged on the board
propped up between them. All round red clay, out of which the abri was
excavated. A smell of antiseptics from the door of the dressing-station
and of lime and latrines mingling with the greasy smell of the movable
kitchen not far away. They are eating dessert, slices of pineapple
speared with a knife out of a can. In their manner there is something
that makes Martin see vividly two gentlemen in frock-coats dining at a
table under the awning of a café on the boulevards. It has a leisurely
ceremoniousness, an ease that could exist nowhere else.

"No, my friend," the doctor is saying, "I do not think that an
apprehension of religion existed in the mind of palæolithic man."

"But, my captain, don't you think that you scientific people sometimes
lose a little of the significance of things, insisting always on their
scientific, in this case on their anthropological, aspect?"

"Not in the least; it is the only way to look at them."

"There are other ways," says the aumonier, smiling.

"One moment...." From under the packing-box the captain produced a small
bottle of anisette. "You'll have a little glass, won't you?"

"With the greatest pleasure. What a rarity here, anisette."

"But, as I was about to say, take our life here, for an example." ... A
shell shrieks overhead and crashes hollowly in the woods behind the
dugout. Another follows it, exploding nearer. The captain picks a few
bits of gravel off the table, reaches for his helmet and continues. "For
example, our life here, which is, as was the life of palæolithic man,
taken up only with the bare struggle for existence against overwhelming
odds. You know yourself that it is not conducive to religion or any
emotion except that of preservation."

"I hardly admit that.... Ah, I saved it," the aumonier announces,
catching the bottle of anisette as it is about to fall off the table. An
exploding shell rends the air about them. There is a pause, and a shower
of earth and gravel tumbles about their ears.

"I must go and see if anyone was hurt," says the aumonier, clambering up
the clay bank to the level of the ground; "but you will admit, my
captain, that the sentiment of preservation is at least akin to the
fundamental feelings of religion."

"My dear friend, I admit nothing.... Till this evening, good-bye." He
waves his hand and goes into the dugout.

       *       *       *       *       *

Martin and two French soldiers drinking sour wine in the doorway of a
deserted house. It was raining outside and now and then a dripping
camion passed along the road, slithering through the mud.

"This is the last summer of the war.... It must be," said the little man
with large brown eyes and a childish, chubby brown face, who sat on
Martin's left.

"Why?"

"Oh, I don't know. Everyone feels like that."

"I don't see," said Martin, "why it shouldn't last for ten or twenty
years. Wars have before...."

"How long have you been at the front?"

"Six months, off and on."

"After another six months you'll know why it can't go on."

"I don't know; it suits me all right," said the man on the other side of
Martin, a man with a jovial red rabbit-like face. "Of course, I don't
like being dirty and smelling and all that, but one gets accustomed to
it."

"But you are an Alsatian; you don't care."

"I was a baker. They're going to send me to Dijon soon to bake army
bread. It'll be a change. There'll be wine and lots of little girls.
Good God, how drunk I'll be; and, old chap, you just watch me with the
women...."

"I should just like to get home and not be ordered about," said the
first man. "I've been lucky, though," he went on; "I've been kept most
of the time in reserve. I only had to use my bayonet once."

"When was that?" asked Martin.

"Near Mont Cornélien, last year. We put them to the bayonet and I was
running and a man threw his arms up just in front of me saying, 'Mon
ami, mon ami,' in French. I ran on because I couldn't stop, and I heard
my bayonet grind as it went through his chest. I tripped over something
and fell down."

"You were scared," said the Alsatian.

"Of course I was scared. I was trembling all over like an old dog in a
thunderstorm. When I got up, he was lying on his side with his mouth
open and blood running out, my bayonet still sticking into him. You know
you have to put your foot against a man and pull hard to get the bayonet
out."

"And if you're good at it," cried the Alsatian, "you ought to yank it
out as your Boche falls and be ready for the next one. The time they
gave me the Croix de Guerre I got three in succession, just like at
drill."

"Oh, I was so sorry I had killed him," went on the other Frenchman.
"When I went through his pockets I found a post-card. Here it is; I have
it." He pulled out a cracked and worn leather wallet, from which he took
a photograph and a bunch of pictures. "Look, this photograph was there,
too. It hurt my heart. You see, it's a woman and two little girls. They
look so nice.... It's strange, but I have two children, too, only one's
a boy. I lay down on the ground beside him--I was all in--and listened
to the machine-guns tapping put, put, put, put, put, all round. I wished
I'd let him kill me instead. That was funny, wasn't it?"

"It's idiotic to feel like that. Put them to the bayonet, all of them,
the dirty Boches. Why, the only money I've had since the war began,
except my five sous, was fifty francs I found on a German officer. I
wonder where he got it, the old corpse-stripper."

"Oh, it's shameful! I am ashamed of being a man. Oh, the shame, the
shame ..." The other man buried his face in his hands.

"I wish they were serving out gniolle for an attack right now," said the
Alsatian, "or the gniolle without the attack 'd be better yet."

"Wait here," said Martin, "I'll go round to the copé and get a bottle of
fizzy. We'll drink to peace or war, as you like. Damn this rain!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's a shame to bury those boots," said the sergeant of the
stretcher-bearers.

From the long roll of blanket on the ground beside the hastily-dug grave
protruded a pair of high boots, new and well polished as if for parade.
All about the earth was scarred with turned clay like raw wounds, and
the tilting arms of little wooden crosses huddled together, with here
and there a bent wreath or a faded bunch of flowers.

Overhead in the stripped trees a bird was singing.

"Shall we take them off? It's a shame to bury a pair of boots like
that."

"So many poor devils need boots."

"Boots cost so dear."

Already two men were lowering the long bundle into the grave.

"Wait a minute; we've got a coffin for him."

A white board coffin was brought.

The boots thumped against the bottom as they put the big bundle in.

An officer strode into the enclosure of the graveyard, flicking his
knees with a twig.

"Is this Lieutenant Dupont?" he asked of the sergeant.

"Yes, my lieutenant."

"Can you see his face?" The officer stooped and pulled apart the blanket
where the head was.

"Poor René," he said. "Thank you. Good-bye," and strode out of the
graveyard.

The yellowish clay fell in clots on the boards of the coffin. The
sergeant bared his head and the aumonier came up, opening his book with
a vaguely professional air.

"It was a shame to bury those boots. Boots are so dear nowadays," said
the sergeant, mumbling to himself as he walked back towards the little
broad shanty they used as a morgue.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of the house, a little pale salmon-coloured villa, only a shell
remained, but the garden was quite untouched; fall roses and bunches of
white and pink and violet phlox bloomed there among the long grass and
the intruding nettles. In the centre the round concrete fountain was no
longer full of water, but a few brownish-green toads still inhabited it.
The place smelt of box and sweetbriar and yew, and when you lay down on
the grass where it grew short under the old yew tree by the fountain,
you could see nothing but placid sky and waving green leaves. Martin
Howe and Tom Randolph would spend there the quiet afternoons when they
were off duty, sleeping in the languid sunlight, or chatting lazily,
pointing out to each other tiny things, the pattern of snail-shells, the
glitter of insects' wings, colours, fragrances that made vivid for them
suddenly beauty and life, all that the shells that shrieked overhead, to
explode on the road behind them, threatened to wipe out.

One afternoon Russell joined them, a tall young man with thin face and
aquiline nose and unexpectedly light hair.

"Chef says we may go en repos in three days," he said, throwing himself
on the ground beside the other two.

"We've heard that before," said Tom Randolph. "Division hasn't started
out yet, ole boy; an' we're the last of the division."

"God, I'll be glad to go.... I'm dead," said Russell.

"I was up all last night with dysentery."

"So was I.... It was not funny; first it'd be vomiting, and then
diarrhoea, and then the shells'd start coming in. Gave me a merry time
of it."

"They say it's the gas," said Martin.

"God, the gas! Turns me sick to think of it," said Russell, stroking his
forehead with his hand. "Did I tell you about what happened to me the
night after the attack, up in the woods?"

"No."

"Well, I was bringing a load of wounded down from P.J. Right and I'd got
just beyond the corner where the little muddy hill is--you know, where
they're always shelling--when I found the road blocked. It was so
God-damned black you couldn't see your hand in front of you. A camion'd
gone off the road and another had run into it, and everything was
littered with boxes of shells spilt about."

"Must have been real nice," said Randolph.

"The devilish part of it was that I was all alone. Coney was too sick
with diarrhoea to be any use, so I left him up at the post, running
out at both ends like he'd die. Well ... I yelled and shouted like hell
in my bad French and blew my whistle and sweated, and the damned wounded
inside moaned and groaned. And the shells were coming in so thick I
thought my number'd turn up any time. An' I couldn't get anybody. So I
just climbed up in the second camion and backed it off into the
bushes.... God, I bet it'll take a wrecking crew to get it out...."

"That was one good job.

"But there I was with another square in the road and no chance to pass
that I could see in that darkness. Then what I was going to tell you
about happened. I saw a little bit of light in a ditch beside a big car
that seemed to be laying on its side, and I went down to it and there
was a bunch of camion drivers, sitting round a lantern drinking.

"'Hello, have a drink!' they called out to me, and one of them got up,
waving his arms, ravin' drunk, and threw his arms around me and kissed
me on the mouth. His hair and beard were full of wet mud.... Then he
dragged me into the crowd.

"'Ha, here's a copain come to die with us,' he cried.

"I gave him a shove and he fell down. But another one got up and handed
me a tin cup full of that God-damned gniolle, that I drank not to make
'em sore. Then they all shouted, and stood about me, sayin', 'American's
goin' to die with us. He's goin' to drink with us. He's goin' to die
with us.' And the shells comin' in all the while. God, I was scared.

"'I want to get a camion moved to the side of the road.... Good-bye,' I
said. There didn't seem any use talkin' to them.

"'But you've come to stay with us,' they said, and made me drink some
more booze. 'You've come to die with us. Remember you said so.'

"The sweat was running into my eyes so's I could hardly see. I told 'em
I'd be right back and slipped away into the dark. Then I thought I'd
never get the second camion cranked. At last I managed it and put it so
I could squeeze past, but they saw me and jumped up on the running-board
of the ambulance, tried to stop the car, all yellin' at once, 'It's no
use, the road's blocked both ways. You can't pass. You'd better stay and
die with us. Caput.'

"Well, I put my foot on the accelerator and hit one of them so hard with
the mudguard he fell into the lantern and put it out. Then I got away.
An' how I got past the stuff in that road afterwards was just luck. I
couldn't see a God-damn thing; it was so black and I was so nerved up.
God, I'll never forget these chaps' shoutin', 'Here's a feller come to
die with us.'"

"Whew! That's some story," said Randolph.

"That'll make a letter home, won't it?" said Russell, smiling. "Guess my
girl'll think I'm heroic enough after that."

Martin's eyes were watching a big dragonfly with brown body and cream
and rainbow wings that hovered over the empty fountain and the three
boys stretched on the grass, and was gone against the azure sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

The prisoner had grey flesh, so grimed with mud that you could not tell
if he were young or old. His uniform hung in a formless clot of mud
about a slender frame. They had treated him at the dressing-station for
a gash in his upper arm, and he was being used to help the
stretcher-bearers. Martin sat in the front seat of the ambulance,
watching him listlessly as he walked down the rutted road under the torn
shreds of camouflage that fluttered a little in the wind. Martin
wondered what he was thinking. Did he accept all this stench and filth
and degradation of slavery as part of the divine order of things? Or did
he too burn with loathing and revolt?

And all those men beyond the hill and the wood, what were they thinking?
But how could they think? The lies they were drunk on would keep them
eternally from thinking. They had never had any chance to think until
they were hurried into the jaws of it, where was no room but for
laughter and misery and the smell of blood.

The rutted road was empty now. Most of the batteries were quiet.
Overhead in the brilliant sky aeroplanes snored monotonously.

The woods all about him were a vast rubbish-heap; the jagged, splintered
boles of leafless trees rose in every direction from heaps of brass
shell-cases, of tin cans, of bits of uniform and equipment. The wind
came in puffs laden with an odour as of dead rats in an attic. And this
was what all the centuries of civilisation had struggled for. For this
had generations worn away their lives in mines and factories and forges,
in fields and workshops, toiling, screwing higher and higher the tension
of their minds and muscles, polishing brighter and brighter the mirror
of their intelligence. For this!

The German prisoner and another man had appeared in the road again,
carrying a stretcher between them, walking with the slow, meticulous
steps of great fatigue. A series of shells came in, like three cracks of
a whip along the road. Martin followed the stretcher-bearers into the
dugout.

The prisoner wiped the sweat from his grime-streaked forehead, and
started up the step of the dugout again, a closed stretcher on his
shoulder. Something made Martin look after him as he strolled down the
rutted road. He wished he knew German so that he might call after the
man and ask him what manner of a man he was.

Again, like snapping of a whip, three shells flashed yellow as they
exploded in the brilliant sunlight of the road. The slender figure of
the prisoner bent suddenly double, like a pocket-knife closing, and lay
still. Martin ran out, stumbling in the hard ruts. In a soft child's
voice the prisoner was babbling endlessly, contentedly. Martin kneeled
beside him and tried to lift him, clasping him round the chest under the
arms. He was very hard to lift, for his legs dragged limply in their
soaked trousers, where the blood was beginning to saturate the muddy
cloth, stickily. Sweat dripped from Martin's face, on the man's face,
and he felt the arm-muscles and the ribs pressed against his body as he
clutched the wounded man tightly to him in the effort of carrying him
towards the dugout. The effort gave Martin a strange contentment. It was
as if his body were taking part in the agony of this man's body. At last
they were washed out, all the hatreds, all the lies, in blood and sweat.
Nothing was left but the quiet friendliness of beings alike in every
part, eternally alike.

Two men with a stretcher came from the dugout, and Martin laid the man's
body, fast growing limper, less animated, down very carefully.

As he stood by the car, wiping the blood off his hands with an oily rag,
he could still feel the man's ribs and the muscles of the man's arm
against his side. It made him strangely happy.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the end of the dugout a man was drawing short, hard breath as if he'd
been running. There was the accustomed smell of blood and chloride and
bandages and filthy miserable flesh. Howe lay on a stretcher wrapped in
his blanket, with his coat over him, trying to sleep. There was very
little light from a smoky lamp down at the end where the wounded were.
The French batteries were fairly quiet, but the German shells were
combing through the woods, coming in series of three and four, gradually
nearing the dugout and edging away again. Howe saw the woods as a
gambling table on which, throw after throw, scattered the random dice of
death.

He pulled his blanket up round his head. He must sleep. How silly to
think about it. It was luck. If a shell had his number on it he'd be
gone before the words were out of his mouth. How silly that he might be
dead any minute! What right had a nasty little piece of tinware to go
tearing through his rich, feeling flesh, extinguishing it?

Like the sound of a mosquito in his ear, only louder, more vicious, a
shell-shriek shrilled to the crash.

Damn! How foolish, how supremely silly that tired men somewhere away in
the woods the other side of the lines should be shoving a shell into the
breach of a gun to kill him, Martin Howe!

Like dice thrown on a table, shells burst about the dugout, now one
side, now the other.

"Seem to have taken a fancy to us this evenin'," Howe heard Tom
Randolph's voice from the bunk opposite.

"One," muttered Martin to himself, as he lay frozen with fear, flat on
his back, biting his trembling lips, "two.... God, that was near!"

A dragging instant of suspense, and the shriek growing loud out of the
distance.

"This is us." He clutched the sides of the stretcher.

A snorting roar rocked the dugout. Dirt fell in his face. He looked
about, dazed. The lamp was still burning. One of the wounded men, with a
bandage like an Arab's turban about his head, sat up in his stretcher
with wide, terrified eyes.

"God watches over drunkards and the feeble-minded. Don't let's worry,
Howe," shouted Randolph from his bunk.

"That probably bitched car No. 4 for evermore," he answered, turning on
his stretcher, relieved for some reason from the icy suspense.

"We should worry! We'll foot it home, that's all."

The casting of the dice began again, farther away this time.

"We won that throw," thought Martin.




CHAPTER VIII


Ducks quacking woke Martin. For a moment he could not think where he
was; then he remembered. The rafters of the loft of the farmhouse over
his head were hung with bunches of herbs drying. He lay a long while on
his back looking at them, sniffing the sweetened air, while farmyard
sounds occupied his ears, hens cackling, the grunting of pigs, the
rou-cou-cou-cou, rou-cou-cou-cou of pigeons under the eaves. He
stretched himself and looked about him. He was alone except for Tom
Randolph, who slept in a pile of blankets next to the wall, his head,
with its close-cropped black hair, pillowed on his bare arm. Martin
slipped off the canvas cot he had slept on and went to the window of the
loft, a little square open at the level of the floor, through which came
a dazzle of blue and gold and green. He looked out. Stables and
hay-barns filled two sides of the farmyard below him. Behind them was a
mass of rustling oak-trees. On the lichen-greened tile roofs pigeons
strutted about, putting their coral feet daintily one before the other,
puffing out their glittering breasts. He breathed deep of the smell of
hay and manure and cows and of unpolluted farms.

From the yard came a riotous cackling of chickens and quacking of ducks,
mingled with the peeping of the little broods. In the middle a girl in
blue gingham, sleeves rolled up as far as possible on her brown arms, a
girl with a mass of dark hair loosely coiled above the nape of her neck,
was throwing to the fowls handfuls of grain with a wide gesture.

"And to think that only yesterday ..." said Martin to himself. He
listened carefully for some time. "Wonderful! You can't even hear the
guns."




CHAPTER IX


The evening was pearl-grey when they left the village; in their nostrils
was the smell of the leisurely death of the year, of leaves drying and
falling, of ripened fruit and bursting seed-pods.

"The fall's a maddening sort o' time for me," said Tom Randolph. "It
makes me itch to get up on ma hind legs an' do things, go places."

"I suppose it's that the earth has such a feel of accomplishment," said
Howe.

"You do feel as if Nature had pulled off her part of the job and was
restin'."

They stopped a second and looked about them, breathing deep. On one side
of the road were woods where in long alleys the mists deepened into
purple darkness.

"There's the moon."

"God! it looks like a pumpkin."

"I wish those guns'd shut up 'way off there to the north."

"They're sort of irrelevant, aren't they?"

They walked on, silent, listening to the guns throbbing far away, like
muffled drums beaten in nervous haste.

"Sounds almost like a barrage."

Martin for some reason was thinking of the last verses of Shelley's
_Hellas_. He wished he knew them so that he could recite them.

    "_Faiths and empires gleam
      Like wrecks in a dissolving dream._"

The purple trunks of saplings passed slowly across the broad face of the
moon as they walked along. How beautiful the world was!

"Look, Tom." Martin put his arm about Randolph's shoulder and nodded
towards the moon. "It might be a ship with puffed-out pumpkin-coloured
sails, the way the trees make it look now."

"Wouldn't it be great to go to sea?" said Randolph, looking straight
into the moon, "an' get out of this slaughter-house. It's nice to see
the war, but I have no intention of taking up butchery as a
profession.... There is too much else to do in the world."

They walked slowly along the road talking of the sea, and Martin told
how when he was a little kid he'd had an uncle who used to tell him
about the Vikings and the Swan Path, and how one of the great moments of
his life had been when he and a friend had looked out of their window in
a little inn on Cape Cod one morning and seen the sea and the swaying
gold path of the sun on it, stretching away, beyond the horizon.

"Poor old life," he said. "I'd expected to do so much with you." And
they both laughed, a little bitterly.

They were strolling past a large farmhouse that stood like a hen among
chicks in a crowd of little outbuildings. A man in the road lit a
cigarette and Martin recognised him in the orange glare of the match.

"Monsieur Merrier!" He held out his hand. It was the aspirant he had
drunk beer with weeks ago at Brocourt.

"Hah! It's you!"

"So you are en repos here, too?"

"Yes, indeed. But you two come in and see us; we are dying of the
blues."

"We'd love to stop in for a second."

A fire smouldered in the big hearth of the farmhouse kitchen, sending a
little irregular fringe of red light out over the tiled floor. At the
end of the room towards the door three men were seated round a table,
smoking. A candle threw their huge and grotesque shadows on the floor
and on the whitewashed walls, and lit up the dark beams of that part of
the ceiling. The three men got up and everyone shook hands, filling the
room with swaying giant shadows. Champagne was brought and tin cups and
more candles, and the Americans were given the two most comfortable
chairs.

"It's such a find to have Americans who speak French," said a bearded
man with unusually large brilliant eyes. He had been introduced as André
Dubois, "a very terrible person," had added Merrier, laughing. The cork
popped out of the bottle he had been struggling with.

"You see, we never can find out what you think about things.... All we
can do is to be sympathetically inane, and _vive les braves alliés_ and
that sort of stuff."

"I doubt if we Americans do think," said Martin.

"Cigarettes, who wants some cigarettes?" cried Lully, a small man with a
very brown oval face to which long eyelashes and a little bit of silky
black moustache gave almost a winsomeness. When he laughed he showed
brilliant, very regular teeth. As he handed the cigarettes about he
looked searchingly at Martin with eyes disconcertingly intense. "Merrier
has told us about you," he said. "You seem to be the first American
we've met who agreed with us."

"What about?"

"About the war, of course."

"Yes," took up the fourth man, a blonde Norman with an impressive,
rather majestic face, "we were very interested. You see, we bore each
other, talking always among ourselves.... I hope you won't be offended
if I agree with you in saying that Americans never think. I've been in
Texas, you see."

"Really?"

"Yes, I went to a Jesuit College in Dallas. I was preparing to enter the
Society of Jesus."

"How long have you been in the war?" asked André Dubois, passing his
hand across his beard.

"We've both been in the same length of time--about six months."

"Do you like it?"

"I don't have a bad time.... But the people in Boccaccio managed to
enjoy themselves while the plague was at Florence. That seems to me the
only way to take the war."

"We have no villa to take refuge in, though," said Dubois, "and we have
forgotten all our amusing stories."

"And in America--they like the war?"

"They don't know what it is. They are like children. They believe
everything they are told, you see; they have had no experience in
international affairs, like you Europeans. To me our entrance into the
war is a tragedy."

"It's sort of goin' back on our only excuse for existing," put in
Randolph.

"In exchange for all the quiet and the civilisation and the beauty of
ordered lives that Europeans gave up in going to the new world we gave
them opportunity to earn luxury, and, infinitely more important, freedom
from the past, that gangrened ghost of the past that is killing Europe
to-day with its infection of hate and greed of murder.

"America has turned traitor to all that, you see; that's the way we look
at it. Now we're a military nation, an organised pirate like France and
England and Germany."

"But American idealism? The speeches, the notes?" cried Lully, catching
the edge of the table with his two brown hands.

"Camouflage," said Martin.

"You mean it's insincere?"

"The best camouflage is always sincere." Dubois ran his hands through
his hair.

"Of course, why should there be any difference?" he said.

"Oh, we're all dupes, we're all dupes. Look, Lully, old man, fill up the
Americans' glasses."

"Thanks."

"And I used to believe in liberty," said Martin. He raised his tumbler
and looked at the candle through the pale yellow champagne. On the wall
behind him, his arm and hand and the tumbler were shadowed huge in dusky
lavender blue. He noticed that his was the only tumbler.

"I am honoured," he said; "mine is the only glass."

"And that's looted," said Merrier.

"It's funny ..." Martin suddenly felt himself filled with a desire to
talk. "All my life I've struggled for my own liberty in my small way.
Now I hardly know if the thing exists."

"Exists? Of course it does, or people wouldn't hate it so," cried Lully.

"I used to think," went on Martin, "that it was my family I must escape
from to be free; I mean all the conventional ties, the worship of
success and the respectabilities that is drummed into you when you're
young."

"I suppose everyone has thought that...."

"How stupid we were before the war, how we prated of small revolts, how
we sniggered over little jokes at religion and government. And all the
while, in the infinite greed, in the infinite stupidity of men, this was
being prepared." André Dubois was speaking, puffing nervously at a
cigarette between phrases, now and then pulling at his beard with a
long, sinewy hand.

"What terrifies me rather is their power to enslave our minds," Martin
went on, his voice growing louder and surer as his idea carried him
along. "I shall never forget the flags, the menacing, exultant flags
along all the streets before we went to war, the gradual unbaring of
teeth, gradual lulling to sleep of people's humanity and sense by the
phrases, the phrases.... America, as you know, is ruled by the press.
And the press is ruled by whom? Who shall ever know what dark forces
bought and bought until we should be ready to go blinded and gagged to
war?... People seem to so love to be fooled. Intellect used to mean
freedom, a light struggling against darkness. Now the darkness is using
the light for its own purposes.... We are slaves of bought intellect,
willing slaves."

"But, Howe, the minute you see that and laugh at it, you're not a slave.
Laugh and be individually as decent as you can, and don't worry your
head about the rest of the world; and have a good time in spite of the
God-damned scoundrels," broke out Randolph in English. "No use worrying
yourself into the grave over a thing you can't help."

"There is one solution and one only, my friends," said the blonde
Norman; "the Church...." He sat up straight in his chair, speaking
slowly with expressionless face. "People are too weak and too kindly to
shift for themselves. Government of some sort there must be. Lay
Government has proved through all the tragic years of history to be
merely a ruse of the strong to oppress the weak, of the wicked to fool
the confiding. There remains only religion. In the organisation of
religion lies the natural and suitable arrangement for the happiness of
man. The Church will govern not through physical force but through
spiritual force."

"The force of fear." Lully jumped to his feet impatiently, making the
bottles sway on the table.

"The force of love.... I once thought as you do, my friend," said the
Norman, pulling Lully back into his chair with a smile.

Lully drank a glass of champagne greedily and undid the buttons of his
blue jacket.

"Go on," he said; "it's madness."

"All the evil of the Church," went on the Norman's even voice, "comes
from her struggles to attain supremacy. Once assured of triumph,
established as the rule of the world, it becomes the natural channel
through which the wise rule and direct the stupid, not for their own
interest, not for ambition for worldly things, but for the love that is
in them. The freedom the Church offers is the only true freedom. It
denies the world, and the slaveries and rewards of it. It gives the love
of God as the only aim of life."

"But think of the Church to-day, the cardinals at Rome, the Church
turned everywhere to the worship of tribal gods...."

"Yes, but admit that that can be changed. The Church has been supreme in
the past; can it not again be supreme? All the evil comes from the
struggle, from the compromise. Picture to yourself for a moment a world
conquered by the Church, ruled through the soul and mind, where force
will not exist, where instead of all the multitudinous tyrannies man has
choked his life with in organising against other men, will exist the one
supreme thing, the Church of God. Instead of many hatreds, one love.
Instead of many slaveries, one freedom."

"A single tyranny, instead of a million. What's the choice?" cried
Lully.

"But you are both violent, my children." Merrier got to his feet and
smilingly filled the glasses all round. "You go at the matter too much
from the heroic point of view. All this sermonising does no good. We are
very simple people who want to live quietly and have plenty to eat and
have no one worry us or hurt us in the little span of sunlight before we
die. All we have now is the same war between the classes: those that
exploit and those that are exploited. The cunning, unscrupulous people
control the humane, kindly people. This war that has smashed our little
European world in which order was so painfully taking the place of
chaos, seems to me merely a gigantic battle fought over the plunder of
the world by the pirates who have grown fat to the point of madness on
the work of their own people, on the work of the millions in Africa, in
India, in America, who have come directly or indirectly under the yoke
of the insane greed of the white races. Well, our edifice is ruined.
Let's think no more of it. Ours is now the duty of rebuilding,
reorganising. I have not faith enough in human nature to be an
anarchist.... We are too like sheep; we must go in flocks, and a flock
to live must organise. There is plenty for everyone, even with the huge
growth in population all over the world. What we want is organisation
from the bottom, organisation by the ungreedy, by the humane, by the
uncunning, socialism of the masses that shall spring from the natural
need of men to help one another; not socialism from the top to the ends
of the governors, that they may clamp us tighter in their fetters. We
must stop the economic war, the war for existence of man against man.
That will be the first step in the long climb to civilisation. They must
co-operate, they must learn that it is saner and more advantageous to
help one another than to hinder one another in the great war against
nature. And the tyranny of the feudal money lords, the unspeakable
misery of this war is driving men closer together into fraternity,
co-operation. It is the lower classes, therefore, that the new world
must be founded on. The rich must be extinguished; with them wars
will die. First between rich and poor, between the exploiter and
the exploited...."

"They have one thing in common," interrupted the blonde Norman, smiling.

"What's that?"

"Humanity.... That is, feebleness, cowardice."

"No, indeed. All through the world's history there has been one law for
the lord and another for the slave, one humanity for the lord and
another humanity for the slave. What we must strive for is a true
universal humanity."

"True," cried Lully, "but why take the longest, the most difficult road?
You say that people are sheep; they must be driven. I say that you and I
and our American friends here are not sheep. We are capable of standing
alone, of judging all for ourselves, and we are just ordinary people
like anyone else."

"Oh, but look at us, Lully!" interrupted Merrier. "We are too weak and
too cowardly ..."

"An example," said Martin, excitedly leaning across the table. "We none
of us believe that war is right or useful or anything but a hideous
method of mutual suicide. Have we the courage of our own faith?"

"As I said," Merrier took up again, "I have too little faith to be an
anarchist, but I have too much to believe in religion." His tin cup
rapped sharply on the table as he set it down.

"No," Lully continued, after a pause, "it is better for man to worship
God, his image on the clouds, the creation of his fancy, than to worship
the vulgar apparatus of organised life, government. Better sacrifice his
children to Moloch than to that society for the propagation and
protection of commerce, the nation. Oh, think of the cost of government
in all the ages since men stopped living in marauding tribes! Think of
the great men martyred. Think of the thought trodden into the dust....
Give man a chance for once. Government should be purely utilitarian,
like the electric light wires in a house. It is a method for attaining
peace and comfort--a bad one, I think, at that; not a thing to be
worshipped as God. The one reason for it is the protection of property.
Why should we have property? That is the central evil of the world....
That is the cancer that has made life a hell of misery until now; the
inflated greed of it has spurred on our nations of the West to throw
themselves back, for ever, perhaps, into the depths of savagery.... Oh,
if people would only trust their own fundamental kindliness, the
fraternity, the love that is the strongest thing in life. Abolish
property, and the disease of the desire for it, the desire to grasp and
have, and you'll need no government to protect you. The vividness and
resiliency of the life of man is being fast crushed under organisation,
tabulation. Over-organisation is death. It is disorganisation, not
organisation, that is the aim of life."

"I grant that what all of you say is true, but why say it over and over
again?" André Dubois talked, striding back and forth beside the table,
his arms gesticulating. His compound shadow thrown by the candles on the
white wall followed him back and forth, mocking him with huge blurred
gestures. "The Greek philosophers said it and the Indian sages. Our
descendants thousands of years from now will say it and wring their
hands as we do. Has not someone on earth the courage to act?..." The men
at the table turned towards him, watching his tall figure move back and
forth.

"We are slaves. We are blind. We are deaf. Why should we argue, we who
have no experience of different things to go on? It has always been the
same: man the slave of property or religion, of his own shadow.... First
we must burst our bonds, open our eyes, clear our ears. Now we know
nothing but what we are told by the rulers. Oh, the lies, the lies, the
lies, the lies that life is smothered in! We must strike once more for
freedom, for the sake of the dignity of man. Hopelessly, cynically,
ruthlessly we must rise and show at least that we are not taken in; that
we are slaves but not willing slaves. Oh, they have deceived us so many
times. We have been such dupes, we have been such dupes!"

"You are right," said the blonde Norman sullenly; "we have all been
dupes."

A sudden self-consciousness chilled them all to silence for a while.
Without wanting to, they strained their ears to hear the guns. There
they were, throbbing loud, unceasing, towards the north, like hasty
muffled drum-beating.

    _Cease; drain not to its dregs the wine,
     Of bitter Prophecy.
     The world is weary of its past.
     Oh, might it die or rest at last._

All through the talk snatches from _Hellas_ had been running through
Howe's head.

After a long pause he turned to Merrier and asked him how he had fared
in the attack.

"Oh, not so badly. I brought my skin back," said Merrier, laughing. "It
was a dull business. After waiting eight hours under gas bombardment we
got orders to advance, and so over we went with the barrage way ahead of
us. There was no resistance where we were. We took a lot of prisoners
and blew up some dugouts and I had the good luck to find a lot of German
chocolate. It came in handy, I can tell you, as no ravitaillement came
for two days. We just had biscuits and I toasted the biscuits and
chocolate together and had quite good meals, though I nearly died of
thirst afterwards.... We lost heavily, though, when they started
counter-attacking."

"An' no one of you were touched?"

"Luck.... But we lost many dear friends. Oh, it's always like that."

"Look what I brought back--a German gun," said André Dubois, going to
the corner of the room.

"That's some souvenir," said Tom Randolph, sitting up suddenly, shaking
himself out of the reverie he had been sunk in all through the talk of
the evening.

"And I have three hundred rounds. They'll come in handy some day."

"When?"

"In the revolution--after the war."

"That's the stuff I like to hear," cried Randolph, getting to his feet.
"Why wait for the war to end?"

"Why? Because we have not the courage.... But it is impossible until
after the war."

"And then you think it is possible?"

"Yes."

"Will it accomplish anything?"

"God knows."

"One last bottle of champagne," cried Merrier.

They seated themselves round the table again. Martin took in at a glance
the eager sunburned faces, the eyes burning with hope, with
determination, and a sudden joy flared through him.

"Oh, there is hope," he said, drinking down his glass. "We are too
young, too needed to fail. We must find a way, find the first step of a
way to freedom, or life is a hollow mockery."

"To Revolution, to Anarchy, to the Socialist state," they all cried,
drinking down the last of the champagne. All the candles but one had
guttered out. Their shadows swayed and darted in long arms and changing,
grotesque limbs about the room.

"But first there must be peace," said the Norman, Jean Chenier, twisting
his mouth into a faintly bitter smile.

"Oh, indeed, there must be peace."

"Of all slaveries, the slavery of war, of armies, is the bitterest, the
most hopeless slavery." Lully was speaking, his smooth brown face in a
grimace of excitement and loathing. "War is our first enemy."

"But oh, my friend," said Merrier, "we will win in the end. All the
people in all the armies of the world believe as we do. In all the minds
the seed is sprouting."

"Before long the day will come. The tocsin will ring."

"Do you really believe that?" cried Martin. "Have we the courage, have
we the energy, have we the power? Are we the men our ancestors were?"

"No," said Dubois, crashing down on the table with his fist; "we are
merely intellectuals. We cling to a mummified world. But they have the
power and the nerve."

"Who?"

"The stupid average working-people."

"We only can combat the lies," said Lully; "they are so easily duped.
After the war that is what we must do."

"Oh, but we are all such dupes," cried Dubois. "First we must fight the
lies. It is the lies that choke us."
