The shimmering blue of the electric arc lamps was strong in the main
street of the town. At numerous points it was conquered by the orange
glare of the outnumbering gaslights in the windows of shops. Through
this radiant lane moved a crowd, which culminated in a throng before
the post-office, awaiting the distribution of the evening mails.
Occasionally there came into it a shrill electric street-car, the
motor singing like a cageful of grasshoppers, and possessing a great
gong that clanged forth both warnings and simple noise. At the little
theatre, which was a varnish and red plush miniature of one of the
famous New York theatres, a company of strollers was to play "East
Lynne." The young men of the town were mainly gathered at the corners,
in distinctive groups, which expressed various shades and lines of
chumship, and had little to do with any social gradations. There they
discussed everything with critical insight, passing the whole town in
review as it swarmed in the street. When the gongs of the electric
cars ceased for a moment to harry the ears, there could be heard the
sound of the feet of the leisurely crowd on the bluestone pavement,
and it was like the peaceful evening lashing at the shore of a lake.
At the foot of the hill, where two lines of maples sentinelled the
way, an electric lamp glowed high among the embowering branches, and
made most wonderful shadow-etchings on the road below it.

When Johnson appeared amid the throng a member of one of the profane
groups at a corner instantly telegraphed news of this extraordinary
arrival to his companions. They hailed him. "Hello, Henry! Going to
walk for a cake to-night?"

"Ain't he smooth?"

"Why, you've got that cake right in your pocket, Henry!"

"Throw out your chest a little more."

Henry was not ruffled in any way by these quiet admonitions and
compliments. In reply he laughed a supremely good-natured, chuckling
laugh, which nevertheless expressed an underground complacency of
superior metal.

Young Griscom, the lawyer, was just emerging from Reifsnyder's barber
shop, rubbing his chin contentedly. On the steps he dropped his hand
and looked with wide eyes into the crowd. Suddenly he bolted back into
the shop. "Wow!" he cried to the parliament; "you ought to see the
coon that's coming!"

Reifsnyder and his assistant instantly poised their razors high and
turned towards the window. Two belathered heads reared from the
chairs. The electric shine in the street caused an effect like water
to them who looked through the glass from the yellow glamour of
Reifsnyder's shop. In fact, the people without resembled the
inhabitants of a great aquarium that here had a square pane in it.
Presently into this frame swam the graceful form of Henry Johnson.

"Chee!" said Reifsnyder. He and his assistant with one accord threw
their obligations to the winds, and leaving their lathered victims
helpless, advanced to the window. "Ain't he a taisy?" said Reifsnyder,
marvelling.

But the man in the first chair, with a grievance in his mind, had
found a weapon. "Why, that's only Henry Johnson, you blamed idiots!
Come on now, Reif, and shave me. What do you think I am--a mummy?"

Reifsnyder turned, in a great excitement. "I bait you any money that
vas not Henry Johnson! Henry Johnson! Rats!" The scorn put into this
last word made it an explosion. "That man was a Pullman-car porter or
someding. How could that be Henry Johnson?" he demanded, turbulently.
"You vas crazy."

The man in the first chair faced the barber in a storm of indignation.
"Didn't I give him those lavender trousers?" he roared.

And young Griscom, who had remained attentively at the window, said:
"Yes, I guess that was Henry. It looked like him."

"Oh, vell," said Reifsnyder, returning to his business, "if you think
so! Oh, vell!" He implied that he was submitting for the sake of
amiability.

Finally the man in the second chair, mumbling from a mouth made timid
by adjacent lather, said: "That was Henry Johnson all right. Why, he
always dresses like that when he wants to make a front! He's the
biggest dude in town--anybody knows that."

"Chinger!" said Reifsnyder.

[Illustration: "'Henry Johnson! Rats!'"]

Henry was not at all oblivious of the wake of wondering ejaculation
that streamed out behind him. On other occasions he had reaped this
same joy, and he always had an eye for the demonstration. With a face
beaming with happiness he turned away from the scene of his victories
into a narrow side street, where the electric light still hung high,
but only to exhibit a row of tumble-down houses leaning together like
paralytics.

The saffron Miss Bella Farragut, in a calico frock, had been crouched
on the front stoop, gossiping at long range, but she espied her
approaching caller at a distance. She dashed around the corner of the
house, galloping like a horse. Henry saw it all, but he preserved the
polite demeanor of a guest when a waiter spills claret down his cuff.
In this awkward situation he was simply perfect.

The duty of receiving Mr. Johnson fell upon Mrs. Farragut, because
Bella, in another room, was scrambling wildly into her best gown. The
fat old woman met him with a great ivory smile, sweeping back with the
door, and bowing low. "Walk in, Misteh Johnson, walk in. How is you
dis ebenin', Misteh Johnson--how is you?"

Henry's face showed like a reflector as he bowed and bowed, bending
almost from his head to his ankles, "Good-evenin', Mis' Fa'gut;
good-evenin'. How is you dis evenin'? Is all you' folks well, Mis'
Fa'gut?"

After a great deal of kowtow, they were planted in two chairs opposite
each other in the living-room. Here they exchanged the most tremendous
civilities, until Miss Bella swept into the room, when there was more
kowtow on all sides, and a smiling show of teeth that was like an
illumination.

The cooking-stove was of course in this drawing-room, and on the fire
was some kind of a long-winded stew. Mrs. Farragut was obliged to
arise and attend to it from time to time. Also young Sim came in and
went to bed on his pallet in the corner. But to all these
domesticities the three maintained an absolute dumbness. They bowed
and smiled and ignored and imitated until a late hour, and if they had
been the occupants of the most gorgeous salon in the world they could
not have been more like three monkeys.

After Henry had gone, Bella, who encouraged herself in the
appropriation of phrases, said, "Oh, ma, isn't he divine?"

[Illustration: "They Bowed and Smiled Until a Late Hour"]



IV

A Saturday evening was a sign always for a larger crowd to parade the
thoroughfare. In summer the band played until ten o'clock in the
little park. Most of the young men of the town affected to be superior
to this band, even to despise it; but in the still and fragrant
evenings they invariably turned out in force, because the girls were
sure to attend this concert, strolling slowly over the grass, linked
closely in pairs, or preferably in threes, in the curious public
dependence upon one another which was their inheritance. There was no
particular social aspect to this gathering, save that group regarded
group with interest, but mainly in silence. Perhaps one girl would
nudge another girl and suddenly say, "Look! there goes Gertie Hodgson
and her sister!" And they would appear to regard this as an event of
importance.

On a particular evening a rather large company of young men were
gathered on the sidewalk that edged the park. They remained thus
beyond the borders of the festivities because of their dignity, which
would not exactly allow them to appear in anything which was so much
fun for the younger lads. These latter were careering madly through
the crowd, precipitating minor accidents from time to time, but
usually fleeing like mist swept by the wind before retribution could
lay hands upon them.

The band played a waltz which involved a gift of prominence to the
bass horn, and one of the young men on the sidewalk said that the
music reminded him of the new engines on the hill pumping water into
the reservoir. A similarity of this kind was not inconceivable, but
the young man did not say it because he disliked the band's playing.
He said it because it was fashionable to say that manner of thing
concerning the band. However, over in the stand, Billie Harris, who
played the snare-drum, was always surrounded by a throng of boys, who
adored his every whack.

After the mails from New York and Rochester had been finally
distributed, the crowd from the post-office added to the mass already
in the park. The wind waved the leaves of the maples, and, high in the
air, the blue-burning globes of the arc lamps caused the wonderful
traceries of leaf shadows on the ground. When the light fell upon the
upturned face of a girl, it caused it to glow with a wonderful pallor.
A policeman came suddenly from the darkness and chased a gang of
obstreperous little boys. They hooted him from a distance. The leader
of the band had some of the mannerisms of the great musicians, and
during a period of silence the crowd smiled when they saw him raise
his hand to his brow, stroke it sentimentally, and glance upward with
a look of poetic anguish. In the shivering light, which gave to the
park an effect like a great vaulted hall, the throng swarmed, with a
gentle murmur of dresses switching the turf, and with a steady hum of
voices.

[Illustration: "The Band Played a Waltz"]

Suddenly, without preliminary bars, there arose from afar the great
hoarse roar of a factory whistle. It raised and swelled to a sinister
note, and then it sang on the night wind one long call that held the
crowd in the park immovable, speechless. The band-master had been
about to vehemently let fall his hand to start the band on a
thundering career through a popular march, but, smitten by this giant
voice from the night, his hand dropped slowly to his knee, and, his
mouth agape, he looked at his men in silence. The cry died away to a
wail and then to stillness. It released the muscles of the company of
young men on the sidewalk, who had been like statues, posed eagerly,
lithely, their ears turned. And then they wheeled upon each other
simultaneously, and, in a single explosion, they shouted, "One!"

Again the sound swelled in the night and roared its long ominous cry,
and as it died away the crowd of young men wheeled upon each other
and, in chorus, yelled, "Two!"

There was a moment of breathless waiting. Then they bawled, "Second
district!" In a flash the company of indolent and cynical young men
had vanished like a snowball disrupted by dynamite.



V

Jake Rogers was the first man to reach the home of Tuscarora Hose
Company Number Six. He had wrenched his key from his pocket as he tore
down the street, and he jumped at the spring-lock like a demon. As the
doors flew back before his hands he leaped and kicked the wedges from
a pair of wheels, loosened a tongue from its clasp, and in the glare
of the electric light which the town placed before each of its
hose-houses the next comers beheld the spectacle of Jake Rogers bent
like hickory in the manfulness of his pulling, and the heavy cart was
moving slowly towards the doors. Four men joined him at the time, and
as they swung with the cart out into the street, dark figures sped
towards them from the ponderous shadows back of the electric lamps.
Some set up the inevitable question, "What district?"

"Second," was replied to them in a compact howl. Tuscarora Hose
Company Number Six swept on a perilous wheel into Niagara Avenue, and
as the men, attached to the cart by the rope which had been paid out
from the windlass under the tongue, pulled madly in their fervor and
abandon, the gong under the axle clanged incitingly. And sometimes the
same cry was heard, "What district?"

"Second."

[Illustration: "What District"]

On a grade Johnnie Thorpe fell, and exercising a singular muscular
ability, rolled out in time from the track of the on-coming wheel, and
arose, dishevelled and aggrieved, casting a look of mournful
disenchantment upon the black crowd that poured after the machine. The
cart seemed to be the apex of a dark wave that was whirling as if it
had been a broken dam. Back of the lad were stretches of lawn, and in
that direction front-doors were banged by men who hoarsely shouted out
into the clamorous avenue, "What district?"

At one of these houses a woman came to the door bearing a lamp,
shielding her face from its rays with her hands. Across the cropped
grass the avenue represented to her a kind of black torrent, upon
which, nevertheless, fled numerous miraculous figures upon bicycles.
She did not know that the towering light at the corner was continuing
its nightly whine.

Suddenly a little boy somersaulted around the corner of the house as
if he had been projected down a flight of stairs by a catapultian
boot. He halted himself in front of the house by dint of a rather
extraordinary evolution with his legs. "Oh, ma," he gasped, "can I go?
Can I, ma?"

She straightened with the coldness of the exterior mother-judgment,
although the hand that held the lamp trembled slightly. "No, Willie;
you had better come to bed."

Instantly he began to buck and fume like a mustang. "Oh, ma," he
cried, contorting himself--"oh, ma, can't I go? Please, ma, can't I
go? Can't I go, ma?"

"It's half-past nine now, Willie."

He ended by wailing out a compromise: "Well, just down to the corner,
ma? Just down to the corner?"

From the avenue came the sound of rushing men who wildly shouted.
Somebody had grappled the bell-rope in the Methodist church, and now
over the town rang this solemn and terrible voice, speaking from the
clouds. Moved from its peaceful business, this bell gained a new
spirit in the portentous night, and it swung the heart to and fro, up
and down, with each peal of it.

"Just down to the corner, ma?"

"Willie, it's half-past nine now."

[Illustration: "They Did Not Care Much for John Shipley"]



VI

The outlines of the house of Dr. Trescott had faded quietly into the
evening, hiding a shape such as we call Queen Anne against the pall of
the blackened sky. The neighborhood was at this time so quiet, and
seemed so devoid of obstructions, that Hannigan's dog thought it a
good opportunity to prowl in forbidden precincts, and so came and
pawed Trescott's lawn, growling, and considering himself a formidable
beast. Later, Peter Washington strolled past the house and whistled,
but there was no dim light shining from Henry's loft, and presently
Peter went his way. The rays from the street, creeping in silvery
waves over the grass, caused the row of shrubs along the drive to
throw a clear, bold shade.

A wisp of smoke came from one of the windows at the end of the house
and drifted quietly into the branches of a cherry-tree. Its companions
followed it in slowly increasing numbers, and finally there was a
current controlled by invisible banks which poured into the
fruit-laden boughs of the cherry-tree. It was no more to be noted than
if a troop of dim and silent gray monkeys had been climbing a
grapevine into the clouds.

After a moment the window brightened as if the four panes of it had
been stained with blood, and a quick ear might have been led to
imagine the fire-imps calling and calling, clan joining clan,
gathering to the colors. From the street, however, the house
maintained its dark quiet, insisting to a passer-by that it was the
safe dwelling of people who chose to retire early to tranquil dreams.
No one could have heard this low droning of the gathering clans.

Suddenly the panes of the red window tinkled and crashed to the
ground, and at other windows there suddenly reared other flames, like
bloody spectres at the apertures of a haunted house. This outbreak had
been well planned, as if by professional revolutionists.

A man's voice suddenly shouted: "Fire! Fire! Fire!" Hannigan had flung
his pipe frenziedly from him because his lungs demanded room. He
tumbled down from his perch, swung over the fence, and ran shouting
towards the front-door of the Trescotts'. Then he hammered on the
door, using his fists as if they were mallets. Mrs. Trescott instantly
came to one of the windows on the second floor. Afterwards she knew
she had been about to say, "The doctor is not at home, but if you will
leave your name, I will let him know as soon as he comes."

Hannigan's bawling was for a minute incoherent, but she understood
that it was not about croup.

"What?" she said, raising the window swiftly.

"Your house is on fire! You're all ablaze! Move quick if--" His cries
were resounding, in the street as if it were a cave of echoes. Many
feet pattered swiftly on the stones. There was one man who ran with an
almost fabulous speed. He wore lavender trousers. A straw hat with a
bright silk band was held half crumpled in his hand.

As Henry reached the front-door, Hannigan had just broken the lock
with a kick. A thick cloud of smoke poured over them, and Henry,
ducking his head, rushed into it. From Hannigan's clamor he knew only
one thing, but it turned him blue with horror. In the hall a lick of
flame had found the cord that supported "Signing the Declaration." The
engraving slumped suddenly down at one end, and then dropped to the
floor, where it burst with the sound of a bomb. The fire was already
roaring like a winter wind among the pines.

At the head of the stairs Mrs. Trescott was waving her arms as if they
were two reeds.

"Jimmie! Save Jimmie!" she screamed in Henry's face. He plunged past
her and disappeared, taking the long-familiar routes among these upper
chambers, where he had once held office as a sort of second assistant
house-maid.

Hannigan had followed him up the stairs, and grappled the arm of the
maniacal woman there. His face was black with rage. "You must come
down," he bellowed.

She would only scream at him in reply: "Jimmie! Jimmie! Save Jimmie!"
But he dragged her forth while she babbled at him.

As they swung out into the open air a man ran across the lawn, and
seizing a shutter, pulled it from its hinges and flung it far out upon
the grass. Then he frantically attacked the other shutters one by one.
It was a kind of temporary insanity.

"Here, you," howled Hannigan, "hold Mrs. Trescott--And stop--"

The news had been telegraphed by a twist of the wrist of a neighbor
who had gone to the fire-box at the corner, and the time when Hannigan
and his charge struggled out of the house was the time when the
whistle roared its hoarse night call, smiting the crowd in the park,
causing the leader of the band, who was about to order the first
triumphal clang of a military march, to let his hand drop slowly to
his knees.



VII

Henry pawed awkwardly through the smoke in the upper halls. He had
attempted to guide himself by the walls, but they were too hot. The
paper was crimpling, and he expected at any moment to have a flame
burst from under his hands.

"Jimmie!"

He did not call very loud, as if in fear that the humming flames below
would overhear him.

"Jimmie! Oh, Jimmie!"

Stumbling and panting, he speedily reached the entrance to Jimmie's
room and flung open the door. The little chamber had no smoke in it at
all. It was faintly illuminated by a beautiful rosy light reflected
circuitously from the flames that were consuming the house. The boy
had apparently just been aroused by the noise. He sat in his bed, his
lips apart, his eyes wide, while upon his little white-robed figure
played caressingly the light from the fire. As the door flew open he
had before him this apparition of his pal, a terror-stricken negro,
all tousled and with wool scorching, who leaped upon him and bore him
up in a blanket as if the whole affair were a case of kidnapping by a
dreadful robber chief. Without waiting to go through the usual short
but complete process of wrinkling up his face, Jimmie let out a
gorgeous bawl, which resembled the expression of a calf's deepest
terror. As Johnson, bearing him, reeled into the smoke of the hall, he
flung his arms about his neck and buried his face in the blanket. He
called twice in muffled tones: "Mam-ma! Mam-ma!" When Johnson came to
the top of the stairs with his burden, he took a quick step backward.
Through the smoke that rolled to him he could see that the lower hall
was all ablaze. He cried out then in a howl that resembled Jimmie's
former achievement. His legs gained a frightful faculty of bending
sideways. Swinging about precariously on these reedy legs, he made his
way back slowly, back along the upper hall. From the way of him then,
he had given up almost all idea of escaping from the burning house,
and with it the desire. He was submitting, submitting because of his
fathers, bending his mind in a most perfect slavery to this
conflagration.

He now clutched Jimmie as unconsciously as when, running toward the
house, he had clutched the hat with the bright silk band.

Suddenly he remembered a little private staircase which led from a
bedroom to an apartment which the doctor had fitted up as a laboratory
and work-house, where he used some of his leisure, and also hours when
he might have been sleeping, in devoting himself to experiments which
came in the way of his study and interest.

When Johnson recalled this stairway the submission to the blaze
departed instantly. He had been perfectly familiar with it, but his
confusion had destroyed the memory of it.

In his sudden momentary apathy there had been little that resembled
fear, but now, as a way of safety came to him, the old frantic terror
caught him. He was no longer creature to the flames, and he was afraid
of the battle with them. It was a singular and swift set of
alternations in which he feared twice without submission, and
submitted once without fear.

"Jimmie!" he wailed, as he staggered on his way. He wished this little
inanimate body at his breast to participate in his tremblings. But the
child had lain limp and still during these headlong charges and
countercharges, and no sign came from him.

Johnson passed through two rooms and came to the head of the stairs.
As he opened the door great billows of smoke poured out, but gripping
Jimmie closer, he plunged down through them. All manner of odors
assailed him during this flight. They seemed to be alive with envy,
hatred, and malice. At the entrance to the laboratory he confronted a
strange spectacle. The room was like a garden in the region where
might be burning flowers. Flames of violet, crimson, green, blue,
orange, and purple were blooming everywhere. There was one blaze that
was precisely the hue of a delicate coral. In another place was a mass
that lay merely in phosphorescent inaction like a pile of emeralds.
But all these marvels were to be seen dimly through clouds of heaving,
turning, deadly smoke.

Johnson halted for a moment on the threshold. He cried out again in
the negro wail that had in it the sadness of the swamps. Then he
rushed across the room. An orange-colored flame leaped like a panther
at the lavender trousers. This animal bit deeply into Johnson. There
was an explosion at one side, and suddenly before him there reared a
delicate, trembling sapphire shape like a fairy lady. With a quiet
smile she blocked his path and doomed him and Jimmie. Johnson
shrieked, and then ducked in the manner of his race in fights. He
aimed to pass under the left guard of the sapphire lady. But she was
swifter than eagles, and her talons caught in him as he plunged past
her. Bowing his head as if his neck had been struck, Johnson lurched
forward, twisting this way and that way. He fell on his back. The
still form in the blanket flung from his arms, rolled to the edge of
the floor and beneath the window.

Johnson had fallen with his head at the base of an old-fashioned desk.
There was a row of jars upon the top of this desk. For the most part,
they were silent amid this rioting, but there was one which seemed to
hold a scintillant and writhing serpent.

Suddenly the glass splintered, and a ruby-red snakelike thing poured
its thick length out upon the top of the old desk. It coiled and
hesitated, and then began to swim a languorous way down the mahogany
slant. At the angle it waved its sizzling molten head to and fro over
the closed eyes of the man beneath it. Then, in a moment, with a
mystic impulse, it moved again, and the red snake flowed directly down
into Johnson's upturned face.

Afterwards the trail of this creature seemed to reek, and amid flames
and low explosions drops like red-hot jewels pattered softly down it
at leisurely intervals.

[Illustration: "In the Laboratory"]



VIII

Suddenly all roads led to Dr. Trescott's. The whole town flowed
towards one point. Chippeway Hose Company Number One toiled
desperately up Bridge Street Hill even as the Tuscaroras came in an
impetuous sweep down Niagara Avenue. Meanwhile the machine of the
hook-and-ladder experts from across the creek was spinning on its way.
The chief of the fire department had been playing poker in the rear
room of Whiteley's cigar-store, but at the first breath of the alarm
he sprang through the door like a man escaping with the kitty.

In Whilomville, on these occasions, there was always a number of
people who instantly turned their attention to the bells in the
churches and school-houses. The bells not only emphasized the alarm,
but it was the habit to send these sounds rolling across the sky in a
stirring brazen uproar until the flames were practically vanquished.
There was also a kind of rivalry as to which bell should be made to
produce the greatest din. Even the Valley Church, four miles away
among the farms, had heard the voices of its brethren, and immediately
added a quaint little yelp.

Dr. Trescott had been driving homeward, slowly smoking a cigar, and
feeling glad that this last case was now in complete obedience to him,
like a wild animal that he had subdued, when he heard the long
whistle, and chirped to his horse under the unlicensed but perfectly
distinct impression that a fire had broken out in Oakhurst, a new and
rather high-flying suburb of the town which was at least two miles
from his own home. But in the second blast and in the ensuing silence
he read the designation of his own district. He was then only a few
blocks from his house. He took out the whip and laid it lightly on the
mare. Surprised and frightened at this extraordinary action, she
leaped forward, and as the reins straightened like steel bands, the
doctor leaned backward a trifle. When the mare whirled him up to the
closed gate he was wondering whose house could be afire. The man who
had rung the signal-box yelled something at him, but he already knew.
He left the mare to her will.

In front of his door was a maniacal woman in a wrapper. "Ned!" she
screamed at sight of him. "Jimmie! Save Jimmie!"

Trescott had grown hard and chill. "Where?" he said. "Where?"

Mrs. Trescott's voice began to bubble. "Up--up--up--" She pointed at
the second-story windows.

Hannigan was already shouting: "Don't go in that way! You can't go in
that way!"

Trescott ran around the corner of the house and disappeared from them.
He knew from the view he had taken of the main hall that it would be
impossible to ascend from there. His hopes were fastened now to the
stairway which led from the laboratory. The door which opened from
this room out upon the lawn was fastened with a bolt and lock, but he
kicked close to the lock and then close to the bolt. The door with a
loud crash flew back. The doctor recoiled from the roll of smoke, and
then bending low, he stepped into the garden of burning flowers. On
the floor his stinging eyes could make out a form in a smouldering
blanket near the window. Then, as he carried his son towards the door,
he saw that the whole lawn seemed now alive with men and boys, the
leaders in the great charge that the whole town was making. They
seized him and his burden, and overpowered him in wet blankets and
water.

But Hannigan was howling: "Johnson is in there yet! Henry Johnson is
in there yet! He went in after the kid! Johnson is in there yet!"

These cries penetrated to the sleepy senses of Trescott, and he
struggled with his captors, swearing, unknown to him and to them, all
the deep blasphemies of his medical-student days. He rose to his feet
and went again towards the door of the laboratory. They endeavored to
restrain him, although they were much affrighted at him.

But a young man who was a brakeman on the railway, and lived in one of
the rear streets near the Trescotts, had gone into the laboratory and
brought forth a thing which he laid on the grass.



IX

There were hoarse commands from in front of the house. "Turn on your
water, Five!" "Let 'er go, One!" The gathering crowd swayed this way
and that way. The flames, towering high, cast a wild red light on
their faces. There came the clangor of a gong from along some adjacent
street. The crowd exclaimed at it. "Here comes Number Three!" "That's
Three a-comin'!" A panting and irregular mob dashed into view,
dragging a hose-cart. A cry of exultation arose from the little boys.
"Here's Three!" The lads welcomed Never-Die Hose Company Number Three
as if it was composed of a chariot dragged by a band of gods. The
perspiring citizens flung themselves into the fray. The boys danced in
impish joy at the displays of prowess. They acclaimed the approach of
Number Two. They welcomed Number Four with cheers. They were so deeply
moved by this whole affair that they bitterly guyed the late
appearance of the hook and ladder company, whose heavy apparatus had
almost stalled them on the Bridge Street hill. The lads hated and
feared a fire, of course. They did not particularly want to have
anybody's house burn, but still it was fine to see the gathering of
the companies, and amid a great noise to watch their heroes perform
all manner of prodigies.

They were divided into parties over the worth of different companies,
and supported their creeds with no small violence. For instance, in
that part of the little city where Number Four had its home it would
be most daring for a boy to contend the superiority of any other
company. Likewise, in another quarter, where a strange boy was asked
which fire company was the best in Whilomville, he was expected to
answer "Number One." Feuds, which the boys forgot and remembered
according to chance or the importance of some recent event, existed
all through the town.

They did not care much for John Shipley, the chief of the department.
It was true that he went to a fire with the speed of a falling angel,
but when there he invariably lapsed into a certain still mood, which
was almost a preoccupation, moving leisurely around the burning
structure and surveying it, putting meanwhile at a cigar. This quiet
man, who even when life was in danger seldom raised his voice, was not
much to their fancy. Now old Sykes Huntington, when he was chief, used
to bellow continually like a bull and gesticulate in a sort of
delirium. He was much finer as a spectacle than this Shipley, who
viewed a fire with the same steadiness that he viewed a raise in a
large jack-pot. The greater number of the boys could never understand
why the members of these companies persisted in re-electing Shipley,
although they often pretended to understand it, because "My father
says" was a very formidable phrase in argument, and the fathers seemed
almost unanimous in advocating Shipley.

At this time there was considerable discussion as to which company had
gotten the first stream of water on the fire. Most of the boys claimed
that Number Five owned that distinction, but there was a determined
minority who contended for Number One. Boys who were the blood
adherents of other companies were obliged to choose between the two on
this occasion, and the talk waxed warm.

But a great rumor went among the crowds. It was told with hushed
voices. Afterwards a reverent silence fell even upon the boys. Jimmie
Trescott and Henry Johnson had been burned to death, and Dr. Trescott
himself had been most savagely hurt. The crowd did not even feel the
police pushing at them. They raised their eyes, shining now with awe,
towards the high flames.

The man who had information was at his best. In low tones he described
the whole affair. "That was the kid's room--in the corner there. He
had measles or somethin', and this coon--Johnson--was a-settin' up
with 'im, and Johnson got sleepy or somethin' and upset the lamp, and
the doctor he was down in his office, and he came running up, and they
all got burned together till they dragged 'em out."

Another man, always preserved for the deliverance of the final
judgment, was saying: "Oh, they'll die sure. Burned to flinders. No
chance. Hull lot of 'em. Anybody can see." The crowd concentrated its
gaze still more closely upon these flags of fire which waved joyfully
against the black sky. The bells of the town were clashing
unceasingly.

A little procession moved across the lawn and towards the street.
There were three cots, borne by twelve of the firemen. The police
moved sternly, but it needed no effort of theirs to open a lane for
this slow cortege. The men who bore the cots were well known to the
crowd, but in this solemn parade during the ringing of the bells and
the shouting, and with the red glare upon the sky, they seemed utterly
foreign, and Whilomville paid them a deep respect. Each man in this
stretcher party had gained a reflected majesty. They were footmen to
death, and the crowd made subtle obeisance to this august dignity
derived from three prospective graves. One woman turned away with a
shriek at sight of the covered body on the first stretcher, and people
faced her suddenly in silent and mournful indignation. Otherwise there
was barely a sound as these twelve important men with measured tread
carried their burdens through the throng.

The little boys no longer discussed the merits of the different fire
companies. For the greater part they had been routed. Only the more
courageous viewed closely the three figures veiled in yellow blankets.



X

Old Judge Denning Hagenthorpe, who lived nearly opposite the
Trescotts, had thrown his door wide open to receive the afflicted
family. When it was publicly learned that the doctor and his son and
the negro were still alive, it required a specially detailed policeman
to prevent people from scaling the front porch and interviewing these
sorely wounded. One old lady appeared with a miraculous poultice, and
she quoted most damning Scripture to the officer when he said that she
could not pass him. Throughout the night some lads old enough to be
given privileges or to compel them from their mothers remained
vigilantly upon the kerb in anticipation of a death or some such
event. The reporter of the Morning Tribune rode thither on his bicycle
every hour until three o'clock.

Six of the ten doctors in Whilomville attended at Judge Hagenthorpe's
house.

Almost at once they were able to know that Trescott's burns were not
vitally important. The child would possibly be scarred badly, but his
life was undoubtedly safe. As for the negro Henry Johnson, he could
not live. His body was frightfully seared, but more than that, he now
had no face. His face had simply been burned away.

Trescott was always asking news of the two other patients. In the
morning he seemed fresh and strong, so they told him that Johnson was
doomed. They then saw him stir on the bed, and sprang quickly to see
if the bandages needed readjusting. In the sudden glance he threw from
one to another he impressed them as being both leonine and
impracticable.

The morning paper announced the death of Henry Johnson. It contained a
long interview with Edward J. Hannigan, in which the latter described
in full the performance of Johnson at the fire. There was also an
editorial built from all the best words in the vocabulary of the
staff. The town halted in its accustomed road of thought, and turned a
reverent attention to the memory of this hostler. In the breasts of
many people was the regret that they had not known enough to give him
a hand and a lift when he was alive, and they judged themselves stupid
and ungenerous for this failure.

The name of Henry Johnson became suddenly the title of a saint to the
little boys. The one who thought of it first could, by quoting it in
an argument, at once overthrow his antagonist, whether it applied to
the subject or whether it did not.

    "Nigger, nigger, never die.
    Black face and shiny eye."

Boys who had called this odious couplet in the rear of Johnson's march
buried the fact at the bottom of their hearts.

Later in the day Miss Bella Farragut, of No. 7 Watermelon Alley,
announced that she had been engaged to marry Mr. Henry Johnson.



XI

The old judge had a cane with an ivory head. He could never think at
his best until he was leaning slightly on this stick and smoothing the
white top with slow movements of his hands. It was also to him a kind
of narcotic. If by any chance he mislaid it, he grew at once very
irritable, and was likely to speak sharply to his sister, whose mental
incapacity he had patiently endured for thirty years in the old
mansion on Ontario Street. She was not at all aware of her brother's
opinion of her endowments, and so it might be said that the judge had
successfully dissembled for more than a quarter of a century, only
risking the truth at the times when his cane was lost.

On a particular day the judge sat in his armchair on the porch. The
sunshine sprinkled through the lilac-bushes and poured great coins on
the boards. The sparrows disputed in the trees that lined the
pavements. The judge mused deeply, while his hands gently caressed the
ivory head of his cane.

Finally he arose and entered the house, his brow still furrowed in a
thoughtful frown. His stick thumped solemnly in regular beats. On the
second floor he entered a room where Dr. Trescott was working about
the bedside of Henry Johnson. The bandages on the negro's head allowed
only one thing to appear, an eye, which unwinkingly stared at the
judge. The later spoke to Trescott on the condition of the patient.
Afterward he evidently had something further to say, but he seemed to
be kept from it by the scrutiny of the unwinking eye, at which he
furtively glanced from time to time.

When Jimmie Trescott was sufficiently recovered, his mother had taken
him to pay a visit to his grandparents in Connecticut. The doctor had
remained to take care of his patients, but as a matter of truth he
spent most of his time at Judge Hagenthorpe's house, where lay Henry
Johnson. Here he slept and ate almost every meal in the long nights
and days of his vigil.

At dinner, and away from the magic of the unwinking eye, the judge
said, suddenly, "Trescott, do you think it is--" As Trescott paused
expectantly, the judge fingered his knife. He said, thoughtfully, "No
one wants to advance such ideas, but somehow I think that that poor
fellow ought to die."

There was in Trescott's face at once a look of recognition, as if in
this tangent of the judge he saw an old problem. He merely sighed and
answered, "Who knows?" The words were spoken in a deep tone that gave
them an elusive kind of significance.

The judge retreated to the cold manner of the bench. "Perhaps we may
not talk with propriety of this kind of action, but I am induced to
say that you are performing a questionable charity in preserving this
negro's life. As near as I can understand, he will hereafter be a
monster, a perfect monster, and probably with an affected brain. No
man can observe you as I have observed you and not know that it was a
matter of conscience with you, but I am afraid, my friend, that it is
one of the blunders of virtue." The judge had delivered his views with
his habitual oratory. The last three words he spoke with a particular
emphasis, as if the phrase was his discovery.

The doctor made a weary gesture. "He saved my boy's life."

"Yes," said the judge, swiftly--"yes, I know!"

"And what am I to do?" said Trescott, his eyes suddenly lighting like
an outburst from smouldering peat. "What am I to do? He gave himself
for--for Jimmie. What am I to do for him?"

The judge abased himself completely before these words. He lowered his
eyes for a moment. He picked at his cucumbers.

Presently he braced himself straightly in his chair. "He will be your
creation, you understand. He is purely your creation. Nature has very
evidently given him up. He is dead. You are restoring him to life. You
are making him, and he will be a monster, and with no mind.

"He will be what you like, judge," cried Trescott, in sudden, polite
fury. "He will be anything, but, by God! he saved my boy."

The judge interrupted in a voice trembling with emotion: "Trescott!
Trescott! Don't I know?"

Trescott had subsided to a sullen mood. "Yes, you know," he answered,
acidly; "but you don't know all about your own boy being saved from
death." This was a perfectly childish allusion to the judge's
bachelorhood. Trescott knew that the remark was infantile, but he
seemed to take desperate delight in it.

But it passed the judge completely. It was not his spot.

"I am puzzled," said he, in profound thought. "I don't know what to
say."

Trescott had become repentant. "Don't think I don't appreciate what
you say, judge. But--"

"Of course!" responded the judge, quickly. "Of course."

"It--" began Trescott.

"Of course," said the judge.

In silence they resumed their dinner.

"Well," said the judge, ultimately, "it is hard for a man to know what
to do."

"It is," said the doctor, fervidly.

There was another silence. It was broken by the judge:

"Look here, Trescott; I don't want you to think--"

"No, certainly not," answered the doctor, earnestly.

"Well, I don't want you to think I would say anything to--It
was only that I thought that I might be able to suggest to you
that--perhaps--the affair was a little dubious."

With an appearance of suddenly disclosing his real mental
perturbation, the doctor said: "Well, what would you do? Would you
kill him?" he asked, abruptly and sternly.

"Trescott, you fool," said the old man, gently.

"Oh, well, I know, judge, but then--" He turned red, and spoke with
new violence: "Say, he saved my boy--do you see? He saved my boy."

"You bet he did," cried the judge, with enthusiasm. "You bet he did."
And they remained for a time gazing at each other, their faces
illuminated with memories of a certain deed.

After another silence, the judge said, "It is hard for a man to know
what to do."



XII

Late one evening Trescott, returning from a professional call, paused
his buggy at the Hagenthorpe gate. He tied the mare to the old
tin-covered post, and entered the house. Ultimately he appeared with a
companion--a man who walked slowly and carefully, as if he were
learning. He was wrapped to the heels in an old-fashioned ulster. They
entered the buggy and drove away.

After a silence only broken by the swift and musical humming of the
wheels on the smooth road, Trescott spoke. "Henry," he said, "I've got
you a home here with old Alek Williams. You will have everything you
want to eat and a good place to sleep, and I hope you will get along
there all right. I will pay all your expenses, and come to see you as
often as I can. If you don't get along, I want you to let me know as
soon as possible, and then we will do what we can to make it better."

The dark figure at the doctor's side answered with a cheerful laugh.
"These buggy wheels don' look like I washed 'em yesterday, docteh," he
said.

Trescott hesitated for a moment, and then went on insistently, "I am
taking you to Alek Williams, Henry, and I--"

The figure chuckled again. "No, 'deed! No, seh! Alek Williams don'
know a hoss! 'Deed he don't. He don' know a hoss from a pig." The
laugh that followed was like the rattle of pebbles.

Trescott turned and looked sternly and coldly at the dim form in the
gloom from the buggy-top. "Henry," he said, "I didn't say anything
about horses. I was saying--"

"Hoss? Hoss?" said the quavering voice from these near shadows. "Hoss?
'Deed I don' know all erbout a boss! 'Deed I don't." There was a
satirical chuckle.

At the end of three miles the mare slackened and the doctor leaned
forward, peering, while holding tight reins. The wheels of the buggy
bumped often over out-cropping bowlders. A window shone forth, a
simple square of topaz on a great black hill-side. Four dogs charged
the buggy with ferocity, and when it did not promptly retreat, they
circled courageously around the flanks, baying. A door opened near the
window in the hill-side, and a man came and stood on a beach of yellow
light.

"Yah! yah! You Roveh! You Susie! Come yah! Come yah this minit!"

Trescott called across the dark sea of grass, "Hello, Alek!"

"Hello!"

"Come down here and show me where to drive."

The man plunged from the beach into the surf, and Trescott could then
only trace his course by the fervid and polite ejaculations of a host
who was somewhere approaching. Presently Williams took the mare by the
head, and uttering cries of welcome and scolding the swarming dogs,
led the equipage towards the lights. When they halted at the door and
Trescott was climbing out, Williams cried, "Will she stand, docteh?"

"She'll stand all right, but you better hold her for a minute. Now,
Henry." The doctor turned and held both arms to the dark figure. It
crawled to him painfully like a man going down a ladder. Williams took
the mare away to be tied to a little tree, and when he returned he
found them awaiting him in the gloom beyond the rays from the door.

He burst out then like a siphon pressed by a nervous thumb. "Hennery!
Hennery, ma ol' frien'. Well, if I ain' glade. If I ain' glade!"

Trescott had taken the silent shape by the arm and led it forward into
the full revelation of the light. "Well, now, Alek, you can take Henry
and put him to bed, and in the morning I will--"

Near the end of this sentence old Williams had come front to front
with Johnson. He gasped for a second, and then yelled the yell of a
man stabbed in the heart.

For a fraction of a moment Trescott seemed to be looking for epithets.
Then he roared: "You old black chump! You old black--Shut up! Shut up!
Do you hear?"

Williams obeyed instantly in the matter of his screams, but he
continued in a lowered voice: "Ma Lode amassy! Who'd ever think? Ma
Lode amassy!"

Trescott spoke again in the manner of a commander of a battalion.
"Alek!"

The old negro again surrendered, but to himself he repeated in a
whisper, "Ma Lode!" He was aghast and trembling.

As these three points of widening shadows approached the golden
doorway a hale old negress appeared there, bowing. "Good-evenin',
docteh! Good-evenin'! Come in! come in!" She had evidently just
retired from a tempestuous struggle to place the room in order, but
she was now bowing rapidly. She made the effort of a person swimming.

"Don't trouble yourself, Mary," said Trescott, entering. "I've brought
Henry for you to take care of, and all you've got to do is to carry
out what I tell you." Learning that he was not followed, he faced the
door, and said, "Come in, Henry."

Johnson entered. "Whee!" shrieked Mrs. Williams. She almost achieved a
back somersault. Six young members of the tribe of Williams made a
simultaneous plunge for a position behind the stove, and formed a
wailing heap.



XIII

"You know very well that you and your family lived usually on less
than three dollars a week, and now that Dr. Trescott pays you five
dollars a week for Johnson's board, you live like millionaires. You
haven't done a stroke of work since Johnson began to board with
you--everybody knows that--and so what are you kicking about?"

The judge sat in his chair on the porch, fondling his cane, and gazing
down at old Williams, who stood under the lilac-bushes. "Yes, I know,
jedge," said the negro, wagging his head in a puzzled manner. "Tain't
like as if I didn't 'preciate what the docteh done, but--but--well,
yeh see, jedge," he added, gaining a new impetus, "it's--it's hard
wuk. This ol' man nev' did wuk so hard. Lode, no."

"Don't talk such nonsense, Alek," spoke the judge, sharply. "You have
never really worked in your life--anyhow, enough to support a family
of sparrows, and now when you are in a more prosperous condition than
ever before, you come around talking like an old fool."

The negro began to scratch his head. "Yeh see, jedge," he said at
last, "my ol' 'ooman she cain't 'ceive no lady callahs, nohow."

"Hang lady callers'" said the judge, irascibly. "If you have flour in
the barrel and meat in the pot, your wife can get along without
receiving lady callers, can't she?"

"But they won't come ainyhow, jedge," replied Williams, with an air of
still deeper stupefaction. "Noner ma wife's frien's ner noner ma
frien's 'll come near ma res'dence."

"Well, let them stay home if they are such silly people."

The old negro seemed to be seeking a way to elude this argument, but
evidently finding none, he was about to shuffle meekly off. He halted,
however. "Jedge," said he, "ma ol' 'ooman's near driv' abstracted."

"Your old woman is an idiot," responded the judge.

Williams came very close and peered solemnly through a branch of
lilac. "Judge," he whispered, "the chillens."

"What about them?"

Dropping his voice to funereal depths, Williams said, "They--they
cain't eat."

"Can't eat!" scoffed the judge, loudly. "Can't eat! You must think I
am as big an old fool as you are. Can't eat--the little rascals!
What's to prevent them from eating?"

In answer, Williams said, with mournful emphasis, "Hennery." Moved
with a kind of satisfaction at his tragic use of the name, he remained
staring at the judge for a sign of its effect.

The judge made a gesture of irritation. "Come, now, you old scoundrel,
don't beat around the bush any more. What are you up to? What do you
want? Speak out like a man, and don't give me any more of this
tiresome rigamarole."

"I ain't er-beatin' round 'bout nuffin, jedge," replied Williams,
indignantly. "No, seh; I say whatter got to say right out. 'Deed I
do."

"Well, say it, then."

"Jedge," began the negro, taking off his hat and switching his knee
with it, "Lode knows I'd do jes 'bout as much fer five dollehs er week
as ainy cul'd man, but--but this yere business is awful, jedge. I
raikon 'ain't been no sleep in--in my house sence docteh done fetch
'im."

"Well, what do you propose to do about it?"

Williams lifted his eyes from the ground and gazed off through the
trees. "Raikon I got good appetite, an' sleep jes like er dog, but
he--he's done broke me all up. 'Tain't no good, nohow. I wake up in
the night; I hear 'im, mebbe, er-whimperin' an' er-whimperin', an' I
sneak an' I sneak until I try th' do' to see if he locked in. An' he
keep me er-puzzlin' an' er-quakin' all night long. Don't know how'll
do in th' winter. Can't let 'im out where th' chillen is. He'll done
freeze where he is now." Williams spoke these sentences as if he were
talking to himself. After a silence of deep reflection he continued:
"Folks go round sayin' he ain't Hennery Johnson at all. They say he's
er devil!"

"What?" cried the judge.

"Yesseh," repeated Williams, in tones of injury, as if his veracity
had been challenged. "Yesseh. I'm er-tellin' it to yeh straight,
jedge. Plenty cul'd people folks up my way say it is a devil."

"Well, you don't think so yourself, do you?"

"No. 'Tain't no devil. It's Hennery Johnson."

"Well, then, what is the matter with you? You don't care what a lot of
foolish people say. Go on 'tending to your business, and pay no
attention to such idle nonsense."

"'Tis nonsense, jedge; but he _looks_ like er devil."

"What do you care what he looks like?" demanded the judge.

"Ma rent is two dollehs and er half er month," said Williams, slowly.

"It might just as well be ten thousand dollars a month," responded the
judge. "You never pay it, anyhow."

"Then, anoth' thing," continued Williams, in his reflective tone. "If
he was all right in his haid I could stan' it; but, jedge, he's
crazier 'n er loon. Then when he looks like er devil, an' done skears
all ma frien's away, an' ma chillens cain't eat, an' ma ole 'ooman jes
raisin' Cain all the time, an' ma rent two dollehs an' er half er
month, an' him not right in his haid, it seems like five dollehs er
week--"

The judge's stick came down sharply and suddenly upon the floor of the
porch. "There," he said, "I thought that was what you were driving
at."

Williams began swinging his head from side to side in the strange
racial mannerism. "Now hol' on a minnet, jedge," he said, defensively.
"'Tain't like as if I didn't 'preciate what the docteh done. 'Tain't
that. Docteh Trescott is er kind man, an' 'tain't like as if I didn't
'preciate what he done; but--but--"

"But what? You are getting painful, Alek. Now tell me this: did you
ever have five dollars a week regularly before in your life?"

Williams at once drew himself up with great dignity, but in the pause
after that question he drooped gradually to another attitude. In the
end he answered, heroically: "No, jedge, I 'ain't. An' 'tain't like as
if I was er-sayin' five dollehs wasn't er lot er money for a man like
me. But, jedge, what er man oughter git fer this kinder wuk is er
salary. Yesseh, jedge," he repeated, with a great impressive gesture;
"fer this kinder wuk er man oughter git er Salary." He laid a terrible
emphasis upon the final word.

The judge laughed. "I know Dr. Trescott's mind concerning this affair,
Alek; and if you are dissatisfied with your boarder, he is quite ready
to move him to some other place; so, if you care to leave word with me
that you are tired of the arrangement and wish it changed, he will
come and take Johnson away."

Williams scratched his head again in deep perplexity. "Five dollehs is
er big price fer bo'd, but 'tain't no big price fer the bo'd of er
crazy man," he said, finally.

"What do you think you ought to get?" asked the judge.

"Well," answered Alek, in the manner of one deep in a balancing of the
scales, "he looks like er devil, an' done skears e'rybody, an' ma
chillens cain't eat, an' I cain't sleep, an' he ain't right in his
haid, an'--"

"You told me all those things."

After scratching his wool, and beating his knee with his hat, and
gazing off through the trees and down at the ground, Williams said, as
he kicked nervously at the gravel, "Well, jedge, I think it is wuth--"
He stuttered.

"Worth what?"

"Six dollehs," answered Williams, in a desperate outburst.

The judge lay back in his great arm-chair and went through all the
motions of a man laughing heartily, but he made no sound save a slight
cough. Williams had been watching him with apprehension.

"Well," said the judge, "do you call six dollars a salary?"

"No, seh," promptly responded Williams. "'Tain't a salary. No, 'deed!
'Tain't a salary." He looked with some anger upon the man who
questioned his intelligence in this way.

"Well, supposing your children can't eat?"

"I--"

"And supposing he looks like a devil? And supposing all those things
continue? Would you be satisfied with six dollars a week?"

Recollections seemed to throng in Williams's mind at these
interrogations, and he answered dubiously. "Of co'se a man who ain't
right in his haid, an' looks like er devil--But six dollehs--" After
these two attempts at a sentence Williams suddenly appeared as an
orator, with a great shiny palm waving in the air. "I tell yeh, jedge,
six dollehs is six dollehs, but if I git six dollehs for bo'ding
Hennery Johnson, I uhns it! I uhns it!"

"I don't doubt that you earn six dollars for every week's work you
do," said the judge.

"Well, if I bo'd Hennery Johnson fer six dollehs er week, I uhns it! I
uhns it!" cried Williams, wildly.

[Illustration: "'If I Get Six Dollehs for Bo'ding Hennery Johnson, I
Uhns It'"]



XIV

Reifsnyder's assistant had gone to his supper, and the owner of the
shop was trying to placate four men who wished to be shaved at once.
Reifsnyder was very garrulous--a fact which made him rather remarkable
among barbers, who, as a class, are austerely speechless, having been
taught silence by the hammering reiteration of a tradition. It is the
customers who talk in the ordinary event.

As Reifsnyder waved his razor down the cheek of a man in the chair, he
turned often to cool the impatience of the others with pleasant talk,
which they did not particularly heed.

"Oh, he should have let him die," said Bainbridge, a railway engineer,
finally replying to one of the barber's orations. "Shut up, Reif, and
go on with your business!"

Instead, Reifsnyder paused shaving entirely, and turned to front the
speaker. "Let him die?" he demanded. "How vas that? How can you let a
man die?"

"By letting him die, you chump," said the engineer. The others laughed
a little, and Reifsnyder turned at once to his work, sullenly, as a
man overwhelmed by the derision of numbers.

"How vas that?" he grumbled later. "How can you let a man die when he
vas done so much for you?"

"'When he vas done so much for you?'" repeated Bainbridge. "You better
shave some people. How vas that? Maybe this ain't a barber shop?"

A man hitherto silent now said, "If I had been the doctor, I would
have done the same thing."

"Of course," said Reifsnyder. "Any man vould do it. Any man that vas
not like you, you--old--flint-hearted--fish." He had sought the final
words with painful care, and he delivered the collection triumphantly
at Bainbridge. The engineer laughed.

The man in the chair now lifted himself higher, while Reifsnyder began
an elaborate ceremony of anointing and combing his hair. Now free to
join comfortably in the talk, the man said: "They say he is the most
terrible thing in the world. Young Johnnie Bernard--that drives the
grocery wagon--saw him up at Alek Williams's shanty, and he says he
couldn't eat anything for two days."

"Chee!" said Reifsnyder.

"Well, what makes him so terrible?" asked another.

"Because he hasn't got any face," replied the barber and the engineer
in duct.

"Hasn't got any face!" repeated the man. "How can he do without any
face?"

    "He has no face in the front of his head.
    In the place where his face ought to grow."

Bainbridge sang these lines pathetically as he arose and hung his hat
on a hook. The man in the chair was about to abdicate in his favor.
"Get a gait on you now," he said to Reifsnyder. "I go out at 7.31."

As the barber foamed the lather on the cheeks of the engineer he
seemed to be thinking heavily. Then suddenly he burst out. "How would
you like to be with no face?" he cried to the assemblage.

"Oh, if I had to have a face like yours--" answered one customer.

Bainbridge's voice came from a sea of lather. "You're kicking because
if losing faces became popular, you'd have to go out of business."

"I don't think it will become so much popular," said Reifsnyder.

"Not if it's got to be taken off in the way his was taken off," said
another man. "I'd rather keep mine, if you don't mind."

"I guess so!" cried the barber. "Just think!"

The shaving of Bainbridge had arrived at a time of comparative liberty
for him. "I wonder what the doctor says to himself?" he observed. "He
may be sorry he made him live."

"It was the only thing he could do," replied a man. The others seemed
to agree with him.

"Supposing you were in his place," said one, "and Johnson had saved
your kid. What would you do?"

"Certainly!"

"Of course! You would do anything on earth for him. You'd take all the
trouble in the world for him. And spend your last dollar on him. Well,
then?"

"I wonder how it feels to be without any face?" said Reifsnyder,
musingly.

The man who had previously spoken, feeling that he had expressed
himself well, repeated the whole thing. "You would do anything on
earth for him. You'd take all the trouble in the world for him. And
spend your last dollar on him. Well, then?"

"No, but look," said Reifsnyder; "supposing you don't got a face!"



XV

As soon as Williams was hidden from the view of the old judge he began
to gesture and talk to himself. An elation had evidently penetrated to
his vitals, and caused him to dilate as if he had been filled with
gas. He snapped his fingers in the air, and whistled fragments of
triumphal music. At times, in his progress towards his shanty, he
indulged in a shuffling movement that was really a dance. It was to be
learned from the intermediate monologue that he had emerged from his
trials laurelled and proud. He was the unconquerable Alexander
Williams. Nothing could exceed the bold self-reliance of his manner.
His kingly stride, his heroic song, the derisive flourish of his
hands--all betokened a man who had successfully defied the world.

On his way he saw Zeke Paterson coming to town. They hailed each other
at a distance of fifty yards.

"How do, Broth' Paterson?"

"How do, Broth' Williams?"

They were both deacons.

"Is you' folks well, Broth' Paterson?"

"Middlin', middlin'. How's you' folks, Broth' Williams?"

Neither of them had slowed his pace in the smallest degree. They had
simply begun this talk when a considerable space separated them,
continued it as they passed, and added polite questions as they
drifted steadily apart. Williams's mind seemed to be a balloon. He had
been so inflated that he had not noticed that Paterson had definitely
shied into the dry ditch as they came to the point of ordinary
contact.

Afterwards, as he went a lonely way, he burst out again in song and
pantomimic celebration of his estate. His feet moved in prancing
steps.

When he came in sight of his cabin, the fields were bathed in a blue
dusk, and the light in the window was pale. Cavorting and
gesticulating, he gazed joyfully for some moments upon this light.
Then suddenly another idea seemed to attack his mind, and he stopped,
with an air of being suddenly dampened. In the end he approached his
home as if it were the fortress of an enemy.

Some dogs disputed his advance for a loud moment, and then discovering
their lord, slunk away embarrassed. His reproaches were addressed to
them in muffled tones.

Arriving at the door, he pushed it open with the timidity of a new
thief. He thrust his head cautiously sideways, and his eyes met the
eyes of his wife, who sat by the table, the lamp-light defining a half
of her face. '"Sh!" he said, uselessly. His glance travelled swiftly
to the inner door which shielded the one bed-chamber. The
pickaninnies, strewn upon the floor of the living-room, were softly
snoring. After a hearty meal they had promptly dispersed themselves
about the place and gone to sleep. "'Sh!" said Williams again to his
motionless and silent wife. He had allowed only his head to appear.
His wife, with one hand upon the edge of the table and the other at
her knee, was regarding him with wide eyes and parted lips as if he
were a spectre. She looked to be one who was living in terror, and
even the familiar face at the door had thrilled her because it had
come suddenly.

Williams broke the tense silence. "Is he all right?" he whispered,
waving his eyes towards the inner door. Following his glance
timorously, his wife nodded, and in a low tone answered:

"I raikon he's done gone t' sleep."

Williams then slunk noiselessly across his threshold.

He lifted a chair, and with infinite care placed it so that it faced
the dreaded inner door. His wife moved slightly, so as to also
squarely face it. A silence came upon them in which they seemed to be
waiting for a calamity, pealing and deadly.

Williams finally coughed behind his hand. His wife started, and looked
upon him in alarm. "Pears like he done gwine keep quiet ternight," he
breathed. They continually pointed their speech and their looks at the
inner door, paying it the homage due to a corpse or a phantom. Another
long stillness followed this sentence. Their eyes shone white and
wide. A wagon rattled down the distant road. From their chairs they
looked at the window, and the effect of the light in the cabin was a
presentation of an intensely black and solemn night. The old woman
adopted the attitude used always in church at funerals. At times she
seemed to be upon the point of breaking out in prayer.

"He mighty quiet ter-night," whispered Williams. "Was he good
ter-day?" For answer his wife raised her eyes to the ceiling in the
supplication of Job. Williams moved restlessly. Finally he tiptoed to
the door. He knelt slowly and without a sound, and placed his ear near
the key-hole. Hearing a noise behind him, he turned quickly. His wife
was staring at him aghast. She stood in front of the stove, and her
arms were spread out in the natural movement to protect all her
sleeping ducklings.

But Williams arose without having touched the door. "I raikon he
er-sleep," he said, fingering his wool. He debated with himself for
some time. During this interval his wife remained, a great fat statue
of a mother shielding her children.

It was plain that his mind was swept suddenly by a wave of temerity.
With a sounding step he moved towards the door. His fingers were
almost upon the knob when he swiftly ducked and dodged away, clapping
his hands to the back of his head. It was as if the portal had
threatened him. There was a little tumult near the stove, where
Mrs. Williams's desperate retreat had involved her feet with the
prostrate children.

After the panic Williams bore traces of a feeling of shame. He
returned to the charge. He firmly grasped the knob with his left hand,
and with his other hand turned the key in the lock. He pushed the
door, and as it swung portentously open he sprang nimbly to one side
like the fearful slave liberating the lion. Near the stove a group had
formed, the terror stricken mother, with her arms stretched, and the
aroused children clinging frenziedly to her skirts.

The light streamed after the swinging door, and disclosed a room six
feet one way and six feet the other way. It was small enough to enable
the radiance to lay it plain. Williams peered warily around the corner
made by the door-post.

Suddenly he advanced, retired, and advanced again with a howl. His
palsied family had expected him to spring backward, and at his howl
they heaped themselves wondrously. But Williams simply stood in the
little room emitting his howls before an open window. "He's gone! He's
gone! He's gone!" His eye and his hand had speedily proved the fact.
He had even thrown open a little cupboard.

Presently he came flying out. He grabbed his hat, and hurled the outer
door back upon its hinges. Then he tumbled headlong into the night. He
was yelling: "Docteh Trescott! Docteh Trescott!" He ran wildly through
the fields, and galloped in the direction of town. He continued to
call to Trescott, as if the latter was within easy hearing. It was as
if Trescott was poised in the contemplative sky over the running
negro, and could heed this reaching voice--"Docteh Trescott!"

In the cabin, Mrs. Williams, supported by relays from the battalion of
children, stood quaking watch until the truth of daylight came as a
reinforcement and made the arrogant, strutting, swashbuckler
children, and a mother who proclaimed her illimitable courage.

[Illustration: "The Door Swung Portentously Open"]



XVI

Theresa Page was giving a party. It was the outcome of a long series
of arguments addressed to her mother, which had been overheard in part
by her father. He had at last said five words, "Oh, let her have it."
The mother had then gladly capitulated.

Theresa had written nineteen invitations, and distributed them at
recess to her schoolmates. Later her mother had composed five large
cakes, and still later a vast amount of lemonade.

So the nine little girls and the ten little boys sat quite primly in
the dining-room, while Theresa and her mother plied them with cake and
lemonade, and also with ice-cream. This primness sat now quite
strangely upon them. It was owing to the presence of Mrs. Page.
Previously in the parlor alone with their games they had overturned a
chair; the boys had let more or less of their hoodlum spirit shine
forth. But when circumstances could be possibly magnified to warrant
it, the girls made the boys victims of an insufferable pride, snubbing
them mercilessly. So in the dining-room they resembled a class at
Sunday-school, if it were not for the subterranean smiles, gestures,
rebuffs, and poutings which stamped the affair as a children's party.

Two little girls of this subdued gathering were planted in a settle
with their backs to the broad window. They were beaming lovingly upon
each other with an effect of scorning the boys.

Hearing a noise behind her at the window, one little girl turned to
face it. Instantly she screamed and sprang away, covering her face
with her hands. "What was it? What was it?" cried every one in a roar.
Some slight movement of the eyes of the weeping and shuddering child
informed the company that she had been frightened by an appearance at
the window. At once they all faced the imperturbable window, and for a
moment there was a silence. An astute lad made an immediate census of
the other lads. The prank of slipping out and looming spectrally at a
window was too venerable. But the little boys were all present and
astonished.

As they recovered their minds they uttered warlike cries, and through
a side door sallied rapidly out against the terror. They vied with
each other in daring.

None wished particularly to encounter a dragon in the darkness of the
garden, but there could be no faltering when the fair ones in the
dining-room were present. Calling to each other in stern voices, they
went dragooning over the lawn, attacking the shadows with ferocity,
but still with the caution of reasonable beings. They found, however,
nothing new to the peace of the night. Of course there was a lad who
told a great lie. He described a grim figure, bending low and slinking
off along the fence. He gave a number of details, rendering his lie
more splendid by a repetition of certain forms which he recalled from
romances. For instance, he insisted that he had heard the creature
emit a hollow laugh.

Inside the house the little girl who had raised the alarm was still
shuddering and weeping. With the utmost difficulty was she brought to
a state approximating calmness by Mrs. Page. Then she wanted to go
home at once.

Page entered the house at this time. He had exiled himself until he
concluded that this children's party was finished and gone. He was
obliged to escort the little girl home because she screamed again when
they opened the door and she saw the night.

She was not coherent even to her mother. Was it a man? She didn't
know. It was simply a thing, a dreadful thing.



XVII

In Watermelon Alley the Farraguts were spending their evening as usual
on the little rickety porch. Sometimes they howled gossip to other
people on other rickety porches. The thin wail of a baby arose from a
near house. A man had a terrific altercation with his wife, to which
the alley paid no attention at all.

There appeared suddenly before the Farraguts a monster making a low
and sweeping bow. There was an instant's pause, and then occurred
something that resembled the effect of an upheaval of the earth's
surface. The old woman hurled herself backward with a dreadful cry.
Young Sim had been perched gracefully on a railing. At sight of the
monster he simply fell over it to the ground. He made no sound, his
eyes stuck out, his nerveless hands tried to grapple the rail to
prevent a tumble, and then he vanished. Bella, blubbering, and with
her hair suddenly and mysteriously dishevelled, was crawling on her
hands and knees fearsomely up the steps.

Standing before this wreck of a family gathering, the monster
continued to bow. It even raised a deprecatory claw. "Doh' make no
botheration 'bout me, Miss Fa'gut," it said, politely. "No, 'deed. I
jes drap in ter ax if yer well this evenin', Miss Fa'gut. Don' make no
botheration. No, 'deed. I gwine ax you to go to er daince with me,
Miss Fa'gut. I ax you if I can have the magnifercent gratitude of you'
company on that 'casion, Miss Fa'gut."

The girl cast a miserable glance behind her. She was still crawling
away. On the ground beside the porch young Sim raised a strange bleat,
which expressed both his fright and his lack of wind. Presently the
monster, with a fashionable amble, ascended the steps after the girl.

She grovelled in a corner of the room as the creature took a chair. It
seated itself very elegantly on the edge. It held an old cap in both
hands. "Don' make no botheration, Miss Fa'gut. Don' make no
botherations. No, 'deed. I jes drap in ter ax you if you won' do me
the proud of acceptin' ma humble invitation to er daince, Miss
Fa'gut."

She shielded her eyes with her arms and tried to crawl past it, but
the genial monster blocked the way. "I jes drap in ter ax you 'bout er
daince, Miss Fa'gut. I ax you if I kin have the magnifercent gratitude
of you' company on that 'casion, Miss Fa'gut."

In a last outbreak of despair, the girl, shuddering and wailing, threw
herself face downward on the floor, while the monster sat on the edge
of the chair gabbling courteous invitations, and holding the old hat
daintily to his stomach.

At the back of the house, Mrs. Farragut, who was of enormous weight,
and who for eight years had done little more than sit in an armchair
and describe her various ailments, had with speed and agility scaled a
high board fence.

[Illustration: "Mrs. Farragut"]



XVIII

The black mass in the middle of Trescott's property was hardly allowed
to cool before the builders were at work on another house. It had
sprung upward at a fabulous rate. It was like a magical composition
born of the ashes. The doctor's office was the first part to be
completed, and he had already moved in his new books and instruments
and medicines.

Trescott sat before his desk when the chief of police arrived. "Well,
we found him," said the latter.

"Did you?" cried the doctor. "Where?"

"Shambling around the streets at daylight this morning. I'll be blamed
if I can figure on where he passed the night."

"Where is he now?"

"Oh, we jugged him. I didn't know what else to do with him. That's
what I want you to tell me. Of course we can't keep him. No charge
could be made, you know."

"I'll come down and get him."

The official grinned retrospectively. "Must say he had a fine career
while he was out. First thing he did was to break up a children's
party at Page's. Then he went to Watermelon Alley. Whoo! He stampeded
the whole outfit. Men, women, and children running pell-mell, and
yelling. They say one old woman broke her leg, or something, shinning
over a fence. Then he went right out on the main street, and an Irish
girl threw a fit, and there was a sort of a riot. He began to run, and
a big crowd chased him, firing rocks. But he gave them the slip
somehow down there by the foundry and in the railroad yard. We looked
for him all night, but couldn't find him."

"Was he hurt any? Did anybody hit him with a stone?"

"Guess there isn't much of him to hurt any more, is there? Guess he's
been hurt up to the limit. No. They never touched him. Of course
nobody really wanted to hit him, but you know how a crowd gets. It's
like--it's like--"

"Yes, I know."

For a moment the chief of the police looked reflectively at the floor.
Then he spoke hesitatingly. "You know Jake Winter's little girl was
the one that he scared at the party. She is pretty sick, they say."

"Is she? Why, they didn't call me. I always attend the Winter family."

"No? Didn't they?" asked the chief, slowly. "Well--you know--Winter
is--well, Winter has gone clean crazy over this business. He
wanted--he wanted to have you arrested."

"Have me arrested? The idiot! What in the name of wonder could he have
me arrested for?"

"Of course. He is a fool. I told him to keep his trap shut. But then
you know how he'll go all over town yapping about the thing. I thought
I'd better tip you."

"Oh, he is of no consequence; but then, of course, I'm obliged to you,
Sam."

"That's all right. Well, you'll be down tonight and take him out, eh?
You'll get a good welcome from the jailer. He don't like his job for a
cent. He says you can have your man whenever you want him. He's got no
use for him."

"But what is this business of Winter's about having me arrested?"

"Oh, it's a lot of chin about your having no right to allow
this--this--this man to be at large. But I told him to tend to his own
business. Only I thought I'd better let you know. And I might as well
say right now, doctor, that there is a good deal of talk about this
thing. If I were you, I'd come to the jail pretty late at night,
because there is likely to be a crowd around the door, and I'd bring
a--er--mask, or some kind of a veil, anyhow."



XIX

Martha Goodwin was single, and well along into the thin years. She
lived with her married sister in Whilomville. She performed nearly all
the house-work in exchange for the privilege of existence. Every one
tacitly recognized her labor as a form of penance for the early end of
her betrothed, who had died of small-pox, which he had not caught from
her.

But despite the strenuous and unceasing workaday of her life, she was
a woman of great mind. She had adamantine opinions upon the situation
in Armenia, the condition of women in China, the flirtation between
Mrs. Minster of Niagara Avenue and young Griscom, the conflict in the
Bible class of the Baptist Sunday-school, the duty of the United
States towards the Cuban insurgents, and many other colossal matters.
Her fullest experience of violence was gained on an occasion when she
had seen a hound clubbed, but in the plan which she had made for the
reform of the world she advocated drastic measures. For instance, she
contended that all the Turks should be pushed into the sea and
drowned, and that Mrs. Minster and young Griscom should be hanged side
by side on twin gallows. In fact, this woman of peace, who had seen
only peace, argued constantly for a creed of illimitable ferocity. She
was invulnerable on these questions, because eventually she overrode
all opponents with a sniff. This sniff was an active force. It was to
her antagonists like a bang over the head, and none was known to
recover from this expression of exalted contempt. It left them
windless and conquered. They never again came forward as candidates
for suppression. And Martha walked her kitchen with a stern brow, an
invincible being like Napoleon.

Nevertheless her acquaintances, from the pain of their defeats, had
been long in secret revolt. It was in no wise a conspiracy, because
they did not care to state their open rebellion, but nevertheless it
was understood that any woman who could not coincide with one of
Martha's contentions was entitled to the support of others in the
small circle. It amounted to an arrangement by which all were required
to disbelieve any theory for which Martha fought. This, however, did
not prevent them from speaking of her mind with profound respect.

Two people bore the brunt of her ability. Her sister Kate was visibly
afraid of her, while Carrie Dungen sailed across from her kitchen to
sit respectfully at Martha's feet and learn the business of the world.
To be sure, afterwards, under another sun, she always laughed at
Martha and pretended to deride her ideas, but in the presence of the
sovereign she always remained silent or admiring. Kate, the sister,
was of no consequence at all. Her principal delusion was that she did
all the work in the up-stairs rooms of the house, while Martha did it
down-stairs. The truth was seen only by the husband, who treated
Martha with a kindness that was half banter, half deference. Martha
herself had no suspicion that she was the only pillar of the domestic
edifice. The situation was without definitions. Martha made
definitions, but she devoted them entirely to the Armenians and
Griscom and the Chinese and other subjects. Her dreams, which in early
days had been of love of meadows and the shade of trees, of the face
of a man, were now involved otherwise, and they were companioned in
the kitchen curiously, Cuba, the hot-water kettle, Armenia, the
washing of the dishes, and the whole thing being jumbled. In regard to
social misdemeanors, she who was simply the mausoleum of a dead
passion was probably the most savage critic in town. This unknown
woman, hidden in a kitchen as in a well, was sure to have a
considerable effect of the one kind or the other in the life of the
town. Every time it moved a yard, she had personally contributed an
inch. She could hammer so stoutly upon the door of a proposition that
it would break from its hinges and fall upon her, but at any rate it
moved. She was an engine, and the fact that she did not know that she
was an engine contributed largely to the effect. One reason that she
was formidable was that she did not even imagine that she was
formidable. She remained a weak, innocent, and pig-headed creature,
who alone would defy the universe if she thought the universe merited
this proceeding.

One day Carrie Dungen came across from her kitchen with speed. She had
a great deal of grist. "Oh," she cried, "Henry Johnson got away from
where they was keeping him, and came to town last night, and scared
everybody almost to death."

Martha was shining a dish-pan, polishing madly. No reasonable person
could see cause for this operation, because the pan already glistened
like silver. "Well!" she ejaculated. She imparted to the word a deep
meaning. "This, my prophecy, has come to pass." It was a habit.

The overplus of information was choking Carrie. Before she could go on
she was obliged to struggle for a moment. "And, oh, little Sadie
Winter is awful sick, and they say Jake Winter was around this morning
trying to get Doctor Trescott arrested. And poor old Mrs. Farragut
sprained her ankle in trying to climb a fence. And there's a crowd
around the jail all the time. They put Henry in jail because they
didn't know what else to do with him, I guess. They say he is
perfectly terrible."

Martha finally released the dish-pan and confronted the headlong
speaker. "Well!" she said again, poising a great brown rag. Kate had
heard the excited new-comer, and drifted down from the novel in her
room. She was a shivery little woman. Her shoulder-blades seemed to be
two panes of ice, for she was constantly shrugging and shrugging.
"Serves him right if he was to lose all his patients," she said
suddenly, in blood-thirsty tones. She snipped her words out as if her
lips were scissors.

"Well, he's likely to," shouted Carrie Dungen. "Don't a lot of people
say that they won't have him any more? If you're sick and nervous,
Doctor Trescott would scare the life out of you, wouldn't he? He would
me. I'd keep thinking."

Martha, stalking to and fro, sometimes surveyed the two other women
with a contemplative frown.



XX

After the return from Connecticut, little Jimmie was at first much
afraid of the monster who lived in the room over the carriage-house.
He could not identify it in any way. Gradually, however, his fear
dwindled under the influence of a weird fascination. He sidled into
closer and closer relations with it.

One time the monster was seated on a box behind the stable basking in
the rays of the afternoon sun. A heavy crepe veil was swathed about
its head.

Little Jimmie and many companions came around the corner of the
stable. They were all in what was popularly known as the baby class,
and consequently escaped from school a half-hour before the other
children. They halted abruptly at sight of the figure on the box.
Jimmie waved his hand with the air of a proprietor.

"There he is," he said.

"O-o-o!" murmured all the little boys--"o-o-o!" They shrank back, and
grouped according to courage or experience, as at the sound the
monster slowly turned its head. Jimmie had remained in the van alone.
"Don't be afraid! I won't let him hurt you," he said, delighted.

"Huh!" they replied, contemptuously. "We ain't afraid."

Jimmie seemed to reap all the joys of the owner and exhibitor of one
of the world's marvels, while his audience remained at a
distance--awed and entranced, fearful and envious.

One of them addressed Jimmie gloomily. "Bet you dassent walk right up
to him." He was an older boy than Jimmie, and habitually oppressed him
to a small degree. This new social elevation of the smaller lad
probably seemed revolutionary to him.

"Huh!" said Jimmie, with deep scorn. "Dassent I? Dassent I, hey?
Dassent I?"

The group was immensely excited. It turned its eyes upon the boy that
Jimmie addressed. "No, you dassent," he said, stolidly, facing a moral
defeat. He could see that Jimmie was resolved. "No, you dassent," he
repeated, doggedly.

"Ho?" cried Jimmie. "You just watch!--you just watch!"

Amid a silence he turned and marched towards the monster. But possibly
the palpable wariness of his companions had an effect upon him that
weighed more than his previous experience, for suddenly, when near to
the monster, he halted dubiously. But his playmates immediately
uttered a derisive shout, and it seemed to force him forward. He went
to the monster and laid his hand delicately on its shoulder. "Hello,
Henry," he said, in a voice that trembled a trifle. The monster was
crooning a weird line of negro melody that was scarcely more than a
thread of sound, and it paid no heed to the boy.

Jimmie: strutted back to his companions. They acclaimed him and hooted
his opponent. Amid this clamor the larger boy with difficulty
preserved a dignified attitude.

"I dassent, dassent I?" said Jimmie to him.

"Now, you're so smart, let's see you do it!"

This challenge brought forth renewed taunts from the others. The
larger boy puffed out his checks. "Well, I ain't afraid," he
explained, sullenly. He had made a mistake in diplomacy, and now his
small enemies were tumbling his prestige all about his ears. They
crowed like roosters and bleated like lambs, and made many other
noises which were supposed to bury him in ridicule and dishonor.
"Well, I ain't afraid," he continued to explain through the din.

Jimmie, the hero of the mob, was pitiless. "You ain't afraid, hey?" he
sneered. "If you ain't afraid, go do it, then."

"Well, I would if I wanted to," the other retorted. His eyes wore an
expression of profound misery, but he preserved steadily other
portions of a pot-valiant air. He suddenly faced one of his
persecutors. "If you're so smart, why don't you go do it?" This
persecutor sank promptly through the group to the rear. The incident
gave the badgered one a breathing-spell, and for a moment even turned
the derision in another direction. He took advantage of his interval.
"I'll do it if anybody else will," he announced, swaggering to and
fro.

Candidates for the adventure did not come forward. To defend
themselves from this counter-charge, the other boys again set up their
crowing and bleating. For a while they would hear nothing from him.
Each time he opened his lips their chorus of noises made oratory
impossible. But at last he was able to repeat that he would volunteer
to dare as much in the affair as any other boy.

"Well, you go first," they shouted.

But Jimmie intervened to once more lead the populace against the large
boy. "You're mighty brave, ain't you?" he said to him. "You dared me
to do it, and I did--didn't I? Now who's afraid?" The others cheered
this view loudly, and they instantly resumed the baiting of the large
boy.

He shamefacedly scratched his left shin with his right foot. "Well, I
ain't afraid." He cast an eye at the monster. "Well, I ain't afraid."
With a glare of hatred at his squalling tormentors, he finally
announced a grim intention. "Well, I'll do it, then, since you're so
fresh. Now!"

The mob subsided as with a formidable countenance he turned towards
the impassive figure on the box. The advance was also a regular
progression from high daring to craven hesitation. At last, when some
yards from the monster, the lad came to a full halt, as if he had
encountered a stone wall. The observant little boys in the distance
promptly hooted. Stung again by these cries, the lad sneaked two yards
forward. He was crouched like a young cat ready for a backward spring.
The crowd at the rear, beginning to respect this display, uttered some
encouraging cries. Suddenly the lad gathered himself together, made a
white and desperate rush forward, touched the monster's shoulder with
a far-outstretched finger, and sped away, while his laughter rang out
wild, shrill, and exultant.

The crowd of boys reverenced him at once, and began to throng into his
camp, and look at him, and be his admirers. Jimmie was discomfited for
a moment, but he and the larger boy, without agreement or word of any
kind, seemed to recognize a truce, and they swiftly combined and began
to parade before the others.

"Why, it's just as easy as nothing," puffed the larger boy. "Ain't it,
Jim?"

"Course," blew Jimmie. "Why, it's as e-e-easy."

They were people of another class. If they had been decorated for
courage on twelve battle-fields, they could not have made the other
boys more ashamed of the situation.

Meanwhile they condescended to explain the emotions of the excursion,
expressing unqualified contempt for any one who could hang back. "Why,
it ain't nothin'. He won't do nothin' to you," they told the others,
in tones of exasperation.

One of the very smallest boys in the party showed signs of a wistful
desire to distinguish himself, and they turned their attention to him,
pushing at his shoulders while he swung away from them, and hesitated
dreamily. He was eventually induced to make furtive expedition, but it
was only for a few yards. Then he paused, motionless, gazing with open
mouth. The vociferous entreaties of Jimmie and the large boy had no
power over him.

Mrs. Hannigan had come out on her back porch with a pail of water.
From this coign she had a view of the secluded portion of the Trescott
grounds that was behind the stable. She perceived the group of boys,
and the monster on the box. She shaded her eyes with her hand to
benefit her vision. She screeched then as if she was being murdered.
"Eddie! Eddie! You come home this minute!"

Her son querulously demanded, "Aw, what for?"

"You come home this minute. Do you hear?"

The other boys seemed to think this visitation upon one of their
number required them to preserve for a time the hang-dog air of a
collection of culprits, and they remained in guilty silence until the
little Hannigan, wrathfully protesting, was pushed through the door of
his home. Mrs. Hannigan cast a piercing glance over the group, stared
with a bitter face at the Trescott house, as if this new and handsome
edifice was insulting her, and then followed her son.

There was wavering in the party. An inroad by one mother always caused
them to carefully sweep the horizon to see if there were more coming.
"This is my yard," said Jimmie, proudly. "We don't have to go home."

The monster on the box had turned its black crepe countenance towards
the sky, and was waving its arms in time to a religious chant. "Look
at him now," cried a little boy. They turned, and were transfixed by
the solemnity and mystery of the indefinable gestures. The wail of the
melody was mournful and slow. They drew back. It seemed to spellbind
them with the power of a funeral. They were so absorbed that they did
not hear the doctor's buggy drive up to the stable. Trescott got out,
tied his horse, and approached the group. Jimmie saw him first, and at
his look of dismay the others wheeled.

"What's all this, Jimmie?" asked Trescott, in surprise.

The lad advanced to the front of his companions, halted, and said
nothing. Trescott's face gloomed slightly as he scanned the scene.

"What were you doing, Jimmie?"

"We was playin'," answered Jimmie, huskily.

"Playing at what?"

"Just playin'."

Trescott looked gravely at the other boys, and asked them to please go
home. They proceeded to the street much in the manner of frustrated
and revealed assassins. The crime of trespass on another boy's place
was still a crime when they had only accepted the other boy's cordial
invitation, and they were used to being sent out of all manner of
gardens upon the sudden appearance of a father or a mother. Jimmie had
wretchedly watched the departure of his companions. It involved the
loss of his position as a lad who controlled the privileges of his
father's grounds, but then he knew that in the beginning he had no
right to ask so many boys to be his guests.

Once on the sidewalk, however, they speedily forgot their shame as
trespassers, and the large boy launched forth in a description of his
success in the late trial of courage. As they went rapidly up the
street, the little boy who had made the furtive expedition cried out
confidently from the rear, "Yes, and I went almost up to him, didn't
I, Willie?"

The large boy crushed him in a few words. "Huh!" he scoffed. "You only
went a little way. I went clear up to him."

The pace of the other boys was so manly that the tiny thing had to
trot, and he remained at the rear, getting entangled in their legs in
his attempts to reach the front rank and become of some importance,
dodging this way and that way, and always piping out his little claim
to glory.



XXI

"By-the-way, Grace," said Trescott, looking into the dining-room from
his office door, "I wish you would send Jimmie to me before
school-time."

When Jimmie came, he advanced so quietly that Trescott did not at
first note him. "Oh," he said, wheeling from a cabinet, "here you are,
young man."

"Yes, sir."

Trescott dropped into his chair and tapped the desk with a thoughtful
finger. "Jimmie, what were you doing in the back garden yesterday--you
and the other boys--to Henry?"

"We weren't doing anything, pa."

Trescott looked sternly into the raised eyes of his son. "Are you sure
you were not annoying him in any way? Now what were you doing,
exactly?"

"Why, we--why, we--now--Willie Dalzel said I dassent go right up to
him, and I did; and then he did; and then--the other boys were 'fraid;
and then--you comed."

Trescott groaned deeply. His countenance was so clouded in sorrow that
the lad, bewildered by the mystery of it, burst suddenly forth in
dismal lamentations. "There, there. Don't cry, Jim," said Trescott,
going round the desk. "Only--" He sat in a great leather
reading-chair, and took the boy on his knee. "Only I want to explain
to you--"

After Jimmie had gone to school, and as Trescott was about to start on
his round of morning calls, a message arrived from Doctor Moser. It
set forth that the latter's sister was dying in the old homestead,
twenty miles away up the valley, and asked Trescott to care for his
patients for the day at least. There was also in the envelope a little
history of each case and of what had already been done. Trescott
replied to the messenger that he would gladly assent to the
arrangement.

He noted that the first name on Moser's list was Winter, but this did
not seem to strike him as an important fact. When its turn came, he
rang the Winter bell. "Good-morning, Mrs. Winter," he said,
cheerfully, as the door was opened. "Doctor Moser has been obliged to
leave town to-day, and he has asked me to come in his stead. How is
the little girl this morning?"

Mrs. Winter had regarded him in stony surprise. At last she said:
"Come in! I'll see my husband." She bolted into the house. Trescott
entered the hall, and turned to the left into the sitting-room.

Presently Winter shuffled through the door. His eyes flashed towards
Trescott. He did not betray any desire to advance far into the room.
"What do you want?" he said.

"What do I want? What do I want?" repeated Trescott, lifting his head
suddenly. He had heard an utterly new challenge in the night of the
jungle.

"Yes, that's what I want to know," snapped Winter. "What do you
want?"

Trescott was silent for a moment. He consulted Moser's memoranda. "I
see that your little girl's case is a trifle serious," he remarked. "I
would advise you to call a physician soon. I will leave you a copy of
Dr. Moser's record to give to any one you may call." He paused to
transcribe the record on a page of his note-book. Tearing out the
leaf, he extended it to Winter as he moved towards the door. The
latter shrunk against the wall. His head was hanging as he reached for
the paper. This caused him to grasp air, and so Trescott simply let
the paper flutter to the feet of the other man.

"Good-morning," said Trescott from the hall. This placid retreat
seemed to suddenly arouse Winter to ferocity. It was as if he had then
recalled all the truths which he had formulated to hurl at Trescott.
So he followed him into the hall, and down the hall to the door, and
through the door to the porch, barking in fiery rage from a respectful
distance. As Trescott imperturbably turned the mare's head down the
road, Winter stood on the porch, still yelping. He was like a little
dog.



XXII

"Have you heard the news?" cried Carrie Dungen as she sped towards
Martha's kitchen. "Have you heard the news?" Her eyes were shining
with delight.

"No," answered Martha's sister Kate, bending forward eagerly. "What
was it? What was it?"

Carrie appeared triumphantly in the open door. "Oh, there's been an
awful scene between Doctor Trescott and Jake Winter. I never thought
that Jake Winter had any pluck at all, but this morning he told the
doctor just what he thought of him."

"Well, what did he think of him?" asked Martha.

"Oh, he called him everything. Mrs. Howarth heard it through her front
blinds. It was terrible, she says. It's all over town now. Everybody
knows it."

"Didn't the doctor answer back?"

"No! Mrs. Howarth--she says he never said a word. He just walked down
to his buggy and got in, and drove off as co-o-o-l. But Jake gave him
jinks, by all accounts."

"But what did he say?" cried Kate, shrill and excited. She was
evidently at some kind of a feast.

"Oh, he told him that Sadie had never been well since that night Henry
Johnson frightened her at Theresa Page's party, and he held him
responsible, and how dared he cross his threshold--and--and--and--"

"And what?" said Martha.

"Did he swear at him?" said Kate, in fearsome glee.

"No--not much. He did swear at him a little, but not more than a man
does anyhow when he is real mad, Mrs. Howarth says."

"O-oh!" breathed Kate. "And did he call him any names?"

Martha, at her work, had been for a time in deep thought. She now
interrupted the others. "It don't seem as if Sadie Winter had been
sick since that time Henry Johnson got loose. She's been to school
almost the whole time since then, hasn't she?"

They combined upon her in immediate indignation. "School? School? I
should say not. Don't think for a moment. School!"

Martha wheeled from the sink. She held an iron spoon, and it seemed as
if she was going to attack them. "Sadie Winter has passed here many a
morning since then carrying her schoolbag. Where was she going? To a
wedding?"

The others, long accustomed to a mental tyranny, speedily surrendered.

"Did she?" stammered Kate. "I never saw her."

Carrie Dungen made a weak gesture.

"If I had been Doctor Trescott," exclaimed Martha, loudly, "I'd have
knocked that miserable Jake Winter's head off."

Kate and Carrie, exchanging glances, made an alliance in the air. "I
don't see why you say that, Martha," replied Carrie, with considerable
boldness, gaining support and sympathy from Kate's smile. "I don't see
how anybody can be blamed for getting angry when their little girl
gets almost scared to death and gets sick from it, and all that.
Besides, everybody says--"

"Oh, I don't care what everybody says," said Martha.

"Well, you can't go against the whole town," answered Carrie, in
sudden sharp defiance.

"No, Martha, you can't go against the whole town," piped Kate,
following her leader rapidly.

"'The whole town,'" cried Martha. "I'd like to know what you call 'the
whole town.' Do you call these silly people who are scared of Henry
Johnson 'the whole town'?"

"Why, Martha," said Carrie, in a reasoning tone, "you talk as if you
wouldn't be scared of him!"

"No more would I," retorted Martha.

"O-oh, Martha, how you talk!" said Kate. "Why, the idea! Everybody's
afraid of him."

Carrie was grinning. "You've never seen him, have you?" she asked,
seductively.

"No," admitted Martha.

"Well, then, how do you know that you wouldn't be scared?"

Martha confronted her. "Have you ever seen him? No? Well, then, how do
you know you _would_ be scared?"

The allied forces broke out in chorus: "But, Martha, everybody says
so. Everybody says so."

"Everybody says what?"

"Everybody that's seen him say they were frightened almost to death.
Tisn't only women, but it's men too. It's awful."

Martha wagged her head solemnly. "I'd try not to be afraid of him."

"But supposing you could not help it?" said Kate.

"Yes, and look here," cried Carrie. "I'll tell you another thing. The
Hannigans are going to move out of the house next door."

"On account of him?" demanded Martha.

Carrie nodded. "Mrs. Hannigan says so herself."

"Well, of all things!" ejaculated Martha. "Going to move, eh? You
don't say so! Where they going to move to?"

"Down on Orchard Avenue."

"Well, of all things! Nice house?"

"I don't know about that. I haven't heard. But there's lots of nice
houses on Orchard."

"Yes, but they're all taken," said Kate. "There isn't a vacant house
on Orchard Avenue."

"Oh yes, there is," said Martha. "The old Hampstead house is vacant."

"Oh, of course," said Kate. "But then I don't believe Mrs. Hannigan
would like it there. I wonder where they can be going to move to?"

"I'm sure I don't know," sighed Martha. "It must be to some place we
don't know about."

"Well." said Carrie Dungen, after a general reflective silence, "it's
easy enough to find out, anyhow."

"Who knows--around here?" asked Kate.

"Why, Mrs. Smith, and there she is in her garden," said Carrie,
jumping to her feet. As she dashed out of the door, Kate and Martha
crowded at the window. Carrie's voice rang out from near the steps.
"Mrs. Smith! Mrs. Smith! Do you know where the Hannigans are going to
move to?"



XXIII

The autumn smote the leaves, and the trees of Whilomville were
panoplied in crimson and yellow. The winds grew stronger, and in the
melancholy purple of the nights the home shine of a window became a
finer thing. The little boys, watching the sear and sorrowful leaves
drifting down from the maples, dreamed of the near time when they
could heap bushels in the streets and burn them during the abrupt
evenings.

Three men walked down the Niagara Avenue. As they approached Judge
Hagenthorpe's house he came down his walk to meet them in the manner
of one who has been waiting.

"Are you ready, judge?" one said.

"All ready," he answered.

The four then walked to Trescott's house. He received them in his
office, where he had been reading. He seemed surprised at this visit
of four very active and influential citizens, but he had nothing to
say of it.

After they were all seated, Trescott looked expectantly from one face
to another. There was a little silence. It was broken by John Twelve,
the wholesale grocer, who was worth $400,000, and reported to be worth
over a million.

"Well, doctor," he said, with a short laugh, "I suppose we might as
well admit at once that we've come to interfere in something which is
none of our business."

"Why, what is it?" asked Trescott, again looking from one face to
another. He seemed to appeal particularly to Judge Hagenthorpe, but
the old man had his chin lowered musingly to his cane, and would not
look at him.

"It's about what nobody talks of--much," said Twelve. "It's about
Henry Johnson."

Trescott squared himself in his chair. "Yes?" he said.

Having delivered himself of the title, Twelve seemed to become more
easy. "Yes," he answered, blandly, "we wanted to talk to you about
it."

"Yes?" said Trescott.

[Illustration: "'It's About What Nobody Talks Of--Much,' Said Twelve"]

Twelve abruptly advanced on the main attack. "Now see here, Trescott,
we like you, and we have come to talk right out about this business.
It may be none of our affairs and all that, and as for me, I don't
mind if you tell me so; but I am not going to keep quiet and see you
ruin yourself. And that's how we all feel."

"I am not ruining myself," answered Trescott.

"No, maybe you are not exactly ruining yourself," said Twelve, slowly,
"but you are doing yourself a great deal of harm. You have changed
from being the leading doctor in town to about the last one. It is
mainly because there are always a large number of people who are very
thoughtless fools, of course, but then that doesn't change the
condition."

A man who had not heretofore spoken said, solemnly, "It's the women."

"Well, what I want to say is this," resumed Twelve: "Even if there are
a lot of fools in the world, we can't see any reason why you should
ruin yourself by opposing them. You can't teach them anything, you
know."

"I am not trying to teach them anything." Trescott smiled wearily.
"I--It is a matter of--well--"

"And there are a good many of us that admire you for it immensely,"
interrupted Twelve; "but that isn't going to change the minds of all
those ninnies."

"It's the women," stated the advocate of this view again.

"Well, what I want to say is this," said Twelve. "We want you to get
out of this trouble and strike your old gait again. You are simply
killing your practice through your infernal pigheadedness. Now this
thing is out of the ordinary, but there must be ways to--to beat the
game somehow, you see. So we've talked it over--about a dozen of
us--and, as I say, if you want to tell us to mind our own business,
why, go ahead; but we've talked it over, and we've come to the
conclusion that the only way to do is to get Johnson a place somewhere
off up the valley, and--"

Trescott wearily gestured. "You don't know, my friend. Everybody is so
afraid of him, they can't even give him good care. Nobody can attend
to him as I do myself."

"But I have a little no-good farm up beyond Clarence Mountain that I
was going to give to Henry," cried Twelve, aggrieved. "And if you--and
if you--if you--through your house burning down, or anything--why, all
the boys were prepared to take him right off your hands, and--and--"

Trescott arose and went to the window. He turned his back upon them.
They sat waiting in silence. When he returned he kept his face in the
shadow. "No, John Twelve," he said, "it can't be done."

There was another stillness. Suddenly a man stirred on his chair.

"Well, then, a public institution--" he began.

"No," said Trescott; "public institutions are all very good, but he is
not going to one."

In the background of the group old Judge Hagenthorpe was thoughtfully
smoothing the polished ivory head of his cane.



XXIV

Trescott loudly stamped the snow from his feet and shook the flakes
from his shoulders. When he entered the house he went at once to the
dining-room, and then to the sitting-room. Jimmie was there, reading
painfully in a large book concerning giraffes and tigers and
crocodiles.

"Where is your mother, Jimmie?" asked Trescott.

"I don't know, pa," answered the boy. "I think she is up-stairs."

Trescott went to the foot of the stairs and called, but there came no
answer. Seeing that the door of the little drawing-room was open, he
entered. The room was bathed in the half-light that came from the four
dull panes of mica in the front of the great stove. As his eyes grew
used to the shadows he saw his wife curled in an arm-chair. He went to
her. "Why, Grace." he said, "didn't you hear me calling you?"

She made no answer, and as he bent over the chair he heard her trying
to smother a sob in the cushion.

"Grace!" he cried. "You're crying!"

She raised her face. "I've got a headache, a dreadful headache, Ned."

"A headache?" he repeated, in surprise and incredulity.

He pulled a chair close to hers. Later, as he cast his eye over the
zone of light shed by the dull red panes, he saw that a low table had
been drawn close to the stove, and that it was burdened with many
small cups and plates of uncut tea-cake. He remembered that the day
was Wednesday, and that his wife received on Wednesdays.

"Who was here to-day, Gracie?" he asked.

From his shoulder there came a mumble, "Mrs. Twelve."

"Was she--um," he said. "Why--didn't Anna Hagenthorpe come over?"

The mumble from his shoulder continued, "She wasn't well enough."

Glancing down at the cups, Trescott mechanically counted them. There
were fifteen of them. "There, there," he said. "Don't cry, Grace.
Don't cry."

The wind was whining round the house, and the snow beat aslant upon
the windows. Sometimes the coal in the stove settled with a crumbling
sound, and the four panes of mica flashed a sudden new crimson. As he
sat holding her head on his shoulder, Trescott found himself
occasionally trying to count the cups. There were fifteen of them.



------




THE BLUE HOTEL


I

The Palace Hotel at Fort Romper was painted a light blue, a shade that
is on the legs of a kind of heron, causing the bird to declare its
position against any background. The Palace Hotel, then, was always
screaming and howling in a way that made the dazzling winter landscape
of Nebraska seem only a gray swampish hush. It stood alone on the
prairie, and when the snow was falling the town two hundred yards away
was not visible. But when the traveller alighted at the railway
station he was obliged to pass the Palace Hotel before he could come
upon the company of low clapboard houses which composed Fort Romper,
and it was not to be thought that any traveller could pass the Palace
Hotel without looking at it. Pat Scully, the proprietor, had proved
himself a master of strategy when he chose his paints. It is true that
on clear days, when the great trans-continental expresses, long lines
of swaying Pullmans, swept through Fort Romper, passengers were
overcome at the sight, and the cult that knows the brown-reds and the
subdivisions of the dark greens of the East expressed shame, pity,
horror, in a laugh. But to the citizens of this prairie town and to
the people who would naturally stop there, Pat Scully had performed a
feat. With this opulence and splendor, these creeds, classes,
egotisms, that streamed through Romper on the rails day after day,
they had no color in common.

As if the displayed delights of such a blue hotel were not
sufficiently enticing, it was Scully's habit to go every morning and
evening to meet the leisurely trains that stopped at Romper and work
his seductions upon any man that he might see wavering, gripsack in
hand.

One morning, when a snow-crusted engine dragged its long string of
freight cars and its one passenger coach to the station, Scully
performed the marvel of catching three men. One was a shaky and
quick-eyed Swede, with a great shining cheap valise; one was a tall
bronzed cowboy, who was on his way to a ranch near the Dakota line;
one was a little silent man from the East, who didn't look it, and
didn't announce it. Scully practically made them prisoners. He was so
nimble and merry and kindly that each probably felt it would be the
height of brutality to try to escape. They trudged off over the
creaking board sidewalks in the wake of the eager little Irishman. He
wore a heavy fur cap squeezed tightly down on his head. It caused his
two red ears to stick out stiffly, as if they were made of tin.

At last, Scully, elaborately, with boisterous hospitality, conducted
them through the portals of the blue hotel. The room which they
entered was small. It seemed to be merely a proper temple for an
enormous stove, which, in the centre, was humming with godlike
violence. At various points on its surface the iron had become
luminous and glowed yellow from the heat. Beside the stove Scully's
son Johnnie was playing High-Five with an old farmer who had whiskers
both gray and sandy. They were quarrelling. Frequently the old farmer
turned his face towards a box of sawdust--colored brown from tobacco
juice--that was behind the stove, and spat with an air of great
impatience and irritation. With a loud flourish of words Scully
destroyed the game of cards, and bustled his son up-stairs with part
of the baggage of the new guests. He himself conducted them to three
basins of the coldest water in the world. The cowboy and the Easterner
burnished themselves fiery-red with this water, until it seemed to be
some kind of a metal polish. The Swede, however, merely dipped his
fingers gingerly and with trepidation. It was notable that throughout
this series of small ceremonies the three travellers were made to feel
that Scully was very benevolent. He was conferring great favors upon
them. He handed the towel from one to the other with an air of
philanthropic impulse.

Afterwards they went to the first room, and, sitting about the stove,
listened to Scully's officious clamor at his daughters, who were
preparing the mid-day meal. They reflected in the silence of
experienced men who tread carefully amid new people. Nevertheless, the
old farmer, stationary, invincible in his chair near the warmest part
of the stove, turned his face from the sawdust box frequently and
addressed a glowing commonplace to the strangers. Usually he was
answered in short but adequate sentences by either the cowboy or the
Easterner. The Swede said nothing. He seemed to be occupied in making
furtive estimates of each man in the room. One might have thought that
he had the sense of silly suspicion which comes to guilt. He resembled
a badly frightened man.

Later, at dinner, he spoke a little, addressing his conversation
entirely to Scully. He volunteered that he had come from New York,
where for ten years he had worked as a tailor. These facts seemed to
strike Scully as fascinating, and afterwards he volunteered that he
had lived at Romper for fourteen years. The Swede asked about the
crops and the price of labor. He seemed barely to listen to Scully's
extended replies. His eyes continued to rove from man to man.

Finally, with a laugh and a wink, he said that some of these Western
communities were very dangerous; and after his statement he
straightened his legs under the table, tilted his head, and laughed
again, loudly. It was plain that the demonstration had no meaning to
the others. They looked at him wondering and in silence.



II

As the men trooped heavily back into the front-room, the two little
windows presented views of a turmoiling sea of snow. The huge arms of
the wind were making attempts--mighty, circular, futile--to embrace
the flakes as they sped. A gate-post like a still man with a blanched
face stood aghast amid this profligate fury. In a hearty voice Scully
announced the presence of a blizzard. The guests of the blue hotel,
lighting their pipes, assented with grunts of lazy masculine
contentment. No island of the sea could be exempt in the degree of
this little room with its humming stove. Johnnie, son of Scully, in a
tone which defined his opinion of his ability as a card-player,
challenged the old farmer of both gray and sandy whiskers to a game of
High-Five. The farmer agreed with a contemptuous and bitter scoff.
They sat close to the stove, and squared their knees under a wide
board. The cowboy and the Easterner watched the game with interest.
The Swede remained near the window, aloof, but with a countenance that
showed signs of an inexplicable excitement.

The play of Johnnie and the gray-beard was suddenly ended by another
quarrel. The old man arose while casting a look of heated scorn at his
adversary. He slowly buttoned his coat, and then stalked with fabulous
dignity from the room. In the discreet silence of all other men the
Swede laughed. His laughter rang somehow childish. Men by this time
had begun to look at him askance, as if they wished to inquire what
ailed him.

A new game was formed jocosely. The cowboy volunteered to become the
partner of Johnnie, and they all then turned to ask the Swede to throw
in his lot with the little Easterner, He asked some questions about
the game, and, learning that it wore many names, and that he had
played it when it was under an alias, he accepted the invitation. He
strode towards the men nervously, as if he expected to be assaulted.
Finally, seated, he gazed from face to face and laughed shrilly. This
laugh was so strange that the Easterner looked up quickly, the cowboy
sat intent and with his mouth open, and Johnnie paused, holding the
cards with still fingers.

Afterwards there was a short silence. Then Johnnie said, "Well, let's
get at it. Come on now!" They pulled their chairs forward until their
knees were bunched under the board. They began to play, and their
interest in the game caused the others to forget the manner of the
Swede.

The cowboy was a board-whacker. Each time that he held superior cards
he whanged them, one by one, with exceeding force, down upon the
improvised table, and took the tricks with a glowing air of prowess
and pride that sent thrills of indignation into the hearts of his
opponents. A game with a board-whacker in it is sure to become
intense. The countenances of the Easterner and the Swede were
miserable whenever the cowboy thundered down his aces and kings, while
Johnnie, his eyes gleaming with joy, chuckled and chuckled.

Because of the absorbing play none considered the strange ways of the
Swede. They paid strict heed to the game. Finally, during a lull
caused by a new deal, the Swede suddenly addressed Johnnie: "I suppose
there have been a good many men killed in this room." The jaws of the
others dropped and they looked at him.

"What in hell are you talking about?" said Johnnie.

The Swede laughed again his blatant laugh, full of a kind of false
courage and defiance. "Oh, you know what I mean all right," he
answered.

"I'm a liar if I do!" Johnnie protested. The card was halted, and the
men stared at the Swede. Johnnie evidently felt that as the son of the
proprietor he should make a direct inquiry. "Now, what might you be
drivin' at, mister?" he asked. The Swede winked at him. It was a wink
full of cunning. His fingers shook on the edge of the board. "Oh,
maybe you think I have been to nowheres. Maybe you think I'm a
tenderfoot?"

"I don't know nothin' about you," answered Johnnie, "and I don't give
a damn where you've been. All I got to say is that I don't know what
you're driving at. There hain't never been nobody killed in this
room."

The cowboy, who had been steadily gazing at the Swede, then spoke:
"What's wrong with you, mister?"

Apparently it seemed to the Swede that he was formidably menaced. He
shivered and turned white near the corners of his mouth. He sent an
appealing glance in the direction of the little Easterner. During
these moments he did not forget to wear his air of advanced pot-valor.
"They say they don't know what I mean," he remarked mockingly to the
Easterner.

The latter answered after prolonged and cautious reflection. "I don't
understand you," he said, impassively.

The Swede made a movement then which announced that he thought he had
encountered treachery from the only quarter where he had expected
sympathy, if not help. "Oh, I see you are all against me. I see--"

The cowboy was in a state of deep stupefaction. "Say." he cried, as he
tumbled the deck violently down upon the board "--say, what are you
gittin' at, hey?"

The Swede sprang up with the celerity of a man escaping from a snake
on the floor. "I don't want to fight!" he shouted. "I don't want to
fight!"

The cowboy stretched his long legs indolently and deliberately. His
hands were in his pockets. He spat into the sawdust box. "Well, who
the hell thought you did?" he inquired.

The Swede backed rapidly towards a corner of the room. His hands were
out protectingly in front of his chest, but he was making an obvious
struggle to control his fright. "Gentlemen," he quavered, "I suppose I
am going to be killed before I can leave this house! I suppose I am
going to be killed before I can leave this house!" In his eyes was the
dying-swan look. Through the windows could be seen the snow turning
blue in the shadow of dusk. The wind tore at the house and some loose
thing beat regularly against the clap-boards like a spirit tapping.

A door opened, and Scully himself entered. He paused in surprise as he
noted the tragic attitude of the Swede. Then he said, "What's the
matter here?"

The Swede answered him swiftly and eagerly: "These men are going to
kill me."

"Kill you!" ejaculated Scully. "Kill you! What are you talkin'?"

The Swede made the gesture of a martyr.

Scully wheeled sternly upon his son. "What is this, Johnnie?"

The lad had grown sullen. "Damned if I know," he answered. "I can't
make no sense to it." He began to shuffle the cards, fluttering them
together with an angry snap. "He says a good many men have been killed
in this room, or something like that. And he says he's goin' to be
killed here too. I don't know what ails him. He's crazy, I shouldn't
wonder."

Scully then looked for explanation to the cowboy, but the cowboy
simply shrugged his shoulders.

"Kill you?" said Scully again to the Swede. "Kill you? Man, you're off
your nut."

"Oh, I know." burst out the Swede. "I know what will happen. Yes, I'm
crazy--yes. Yes, of course, I'm crazy--yes. But I know one thing--"
There was a sort of sweat of misery and terror upon his face. "I know
I won't get out of here alive."

The cowboy drew a deep breath, as if his mind was passing into the
last stages of dissolution. "Well, I'm dog-goned," he whispered to
himself.

Scully wheeled suddenly and faced his son. "You've been troublin' this
man!"

Johnnie's voice was loud with its burden of grievance. "Why, good
Gawd, I ain't done nothin' to 'im."

The Swede broke in. "Gentlemen, do not disturb yourselves. I will
leave this house. I will go away because"--he accused them
dramatically with his glance--"because I do not want to be killed."

Scully was furious with his son. "Will you tell me what is the matter,
you young divil? What's the matter, anyhow? Speak out!"

"Blame it!" cried Johnnie in despair, "don't I tell you I don't know.
He--he says we want to kill him, and that's all I know. I can't tell
what ails him."

The Swede continued to repeat: "Never mind, Mr. Scully; nevermind. I
will leave this house. I will go away, because I do not wish to be
killed. Yes, of course, I am crazy--yes. But I know one thing! I will
go away. I will leave this house. Never mind, Mr. Scully; never mind.
I will go away."

"You will not go 'way," said Scully. "You will not go 'way until I
hear the reason of this business. If anybody has troubled you I will
take care of him. This is my house. You are under my roof, and I will
not allow any peaceable man to be troubled here." He cast a terrible
eye upon Johnnie, the cowboy, and the Easterner.

"Never mind, Mr. Scully; never mind. I will go away. I do not wish to
be killed." The Swede moved towards the door, which opened upon the
stairs. It was evidently his intention to go at once for his baggage.

"No, no," shouted Scully peremptorily; but the white-faced man slid by
him and disappeared. "Now," said Scully severely, "what does this
mane?"

Johnnie and the cowboy cried together: "Why, we didn't do nothin' to
'im!"

Scully's eyes were cold. "No," he said, "you didn't?"

Johnnie swore a deep oath. "Why this is the wildest loon I ever see.
We didn't do nothin' at all. We were jest sittin' here play in' cards,
and he--"

The father suddenly spoke to the Easterner. "Mr. Blanc," he asked,
"what has these boys been doin'?"

The Easterner reflected again. "I didn't see anything wrong at all,"
he said at last, slowly.

Scully began to howl. "But what does it mane?" He stared ferociously
at his son. "I have a mind to lather you for this, me boy."

Johnnie was frantic. "Well, what have I done?" he bawled at his
father.



III

"I think you are tongue-tied," said Scully finally to his son, the
cowboy, and the Easterner; and at the end of this scornful sentence he
left the room.

Up-stairs the Swede was swiftly fastening the straps of his great
valise. Once his back happened to be half turned towards the door,
and, hearing a noise there, he wheeled and sprang up, uttering a loud
cry. Scully's wrinkled visage showed grimly in the light of the small
lamp he carried. This yellow effulgence, streaming upward, colored
only his prominent features, and left his eyes, for instance, in
mysterious shadow. He resembled a murderer.

"Man! man!" he exclaimed, "have you gone daffy?"

"Oh, no! Oh, no!" rejoined the other. "There are people in this world
who know pretty nearly as much as you do--understand?"

For a moment they stood gazing at each other. Upon the Swede's deathly
pale checks were two spots brightly crimson and sharply edged, as if
they had been carefully painted. Scully placed the light on the table
and sat himself on the edge of the bed. He spoke ruminatively. "By
cracky, I never heard of such a thing in my life. It's a complete
muddle. I can't, for the soul of me, think how you ever got this idea
into your head." Presently he lifted his eyes and asked: "And did you
sure think they were going to kill you?"

The Swede scanned the old man as if he wished to see into his mind. "I
did," he said at last. He obviously suspected that this answer might
precipitate an outbreak. As he pulled on a strap his whole arm shook,
the elbow wavering like a bit of paper.

Scully banged his hand impressively on the foot-board of the bed.
"Why, man, we're goin' to have a line of ilictric street-cars in this
town next spring."

"'A line of electric street-cars,'" repeated the Swede, stupidly.

"And," said Scully, "there's a new railroad goin' to be built down
from Broken Arm to here. Not to mintion the four churches and the
smashin' big brick school-house. Then there's the big factory, too.
Why, in two years Romper 'll be a _metropolis_."

Having finished the preparation of his baggage, the Swede straightened
himself. "Mr. Scully," he said, with sudden hardihood, "how much do I
owe you?"

"You don't owe me anythin'," said the old man, angrily.

"Yes, I do," retorted the Swede. He took seventy-five cents from his
pocket and tendered it to Scully; but the latter snapped his fingers
in disdainful refusal. However, it happened that they both stood
gazing in a strange fashion at three silver pieces on the Swede's open
palm.

"I'll not take your money," said Scully at last. "Not after what's
been goin' on here." Then a plan seemed to strike him. "Here," he
cried, picking up his lamp and moving towards the door. "Here! Come
with me a minute."

"No," said the Swede, in overwhelming alarm.

"Yes," urged the old man. "Come on! I want you to come and see a
picter--just across the hall--in my room."

The Swede must have concluded that his hour was come. His jaw dropped
and his teeth showed like a dead man's. He ultimately followed Scully
across the corridor, but he had the step of one hung in chains.

Scully flashed the light high on the wall of his own chamber. There
was revealed a ridiculous photograph of a little girl. She was leaning
against a balustrade of gorgeous decoration, and the formidable bang
to her hair was prominent. The figure was as graceful as an upright
sled-stake, and, withal, it was of the hue of lead. "There," said
Scully, tenderly, "that's the picter of my little girl that died. Her
name was Carrie. She had the purtiest hair you ever saw! I was that
fond of her, she--"

Turning then, he saw that the Swede was not contemplating the picture
at all, but, instead, was keeping keen watch on the gloom in the rear.

"Look, man!" cried Scully, heartily. "That's the picter of my little
gal that died. Her name was Carrie. And then here's the picter of my
oldest boy, Michael. He's a lawyer in Lincoln, an' doin' well. I gave
that boy a grand eddycation, and I'm glad for it now. He's a fine boy.
Look at 'im now. Ain't he bold as blazes, him there in Lincoln, an
honored an' respicted gintleman. An honored an' respicted gintleman,"
concluded Scully with a flourish. And, so saying, he smote the Swede
jovially on the back.

The Swede faintly smiled.

"Now," said the old man, "there's only one more thing." He dropped
suddenly to the floor and thrust his head beneath the bed. The Swede
could hear his muffled voice. "I'd keep it under me piller if it
wasn't for that boy Johnnie. Then there's the old woman--Where is it
now? I never put it twice in the same place. Ah, now come out with
you!"

Presently he backed clumsily from under the bed, dragging with him an
old coat rolled into a bundle. "I've fetched him," he muttered.
Kneeling on the floor, he unrolled the coat and extracted from its
heart a large yellow-brown whiskey bottle.

His first maneuver was to hold the bottle up to the light. Reassured,
apparently, that nobody had been tampering with it, he thrust it with
a generous movement towards the Swede.

The weak-kneed Swede was about to eagerly clutch this element of
strength, but he suddenly jerked his hand away and cast a look of
horror upon Scully.

"Drink," said the old man affectionately. He had risen to his feet,
and now stood facing the Swede.

There was a silence. Then again Scully said: "Drink!"

The Swede laughed wildly. He grabbed the bottle, put it to his mouth,
and as his lips curled absurdly around the opening and his throat
worked, he kept his glance, burning with hatred, upon the old man's
face.




IV

After the departure of Scully the three men, with the card-board still
upon their knees, preserved for a long time an astounded silence. Then
Johnnie said: "That's the dod-dangest Swede I ever see."

"He ain't no Swede," said the cowboy, scornfully.

"Well, what is he then?" cried Johnnie. "What is he then?"

"It's my opinion," replied the cowboy deliberately, "he's some kind of
a Dutchman." It was a venerable custom of the country to entitle as
Swedes all light-haired men who spoke with a heavy tongue. In
consequence the idea of the cowboy was not without its daring. "Yes,
sir," he repeated. "It's my opinion this feller is some kind of a
Dutchman."

"Well, he says he's a Swede, anyhow," muttered Johnnie, sulkily. He
turned to the Easterner: "What do you think, Mr. Blanc?"

"Oh, I don't know," replied the Easterner.

"Well, what do you think makes him act that way?" asked the cowboy.

"Why, he's frightened." The Easterner knocked his pipe against a rim
of the stove. "He's clear frightened out of his boots."

"What at?" cried Johnnie and cowboy together.

The Easterner reflected over his answer.

"What at?" cried the others again.

"Oh, I don't know, but it seems to me this man has been reading
dime-novels, and he thinks he's right out in the middle of it--the
shootin' and stabbin' and all."

"But," said the cowboy, deeply scandalized, "this ain't Wyoming, ner
none of them places. This is Nebrasker."

"Yes," added Johnnie, "an' why don't he wait till he gits _out West?_"

The travelled Easterner laughed. "It isn't different there even--not
in these days. But he thinks he's right in the middle of hell."

Johnnie and the cowboy mused long.

"It's awful funny," remarked Johnnie at last.

"Yes," said the cowboy. "This is a queer game. I hope we don't git
snowed in, because then we'd have to stand this here man bein' around
with us all the time. That wouldn't be no good."

"I wish pop would throw him out," said Johnnie.

Presently they heard a loud stamping on the stairs, accompanied by
ringing jokes in the voice of old Scully, and laughter, evidently from
the Swede. The men around the stove stared vacantly at each other.
"Gosh!" said the cowboy. The door flew open, and old Scully, flushed
and anecdotal, came into the room. He was jabbering at the Swede, who
followed him, laughing bravely. It was the entry of two roisterers
from a banquet-hall.

"Come now," said Scully sharply to the three seated men, "move up and
give us a chance at the stove." The cowboy and the Easterner
obediently sidled their chairs to make room for the new-comers.
Johnnie, however, simply arranged himself in a more indolent attitude,
and then remained motionless.

"Come! Git over, there," said Scully.

"Plenty of room on the other side of the stove," said Johnnie.

"Do you think we want to sit in the draught?" roared the father.

But the Swede here interposed with a grandeur of confidence. "No, no.
Let the boy sit where he likes," he cried in a bullying voice to the
father.

"All right! All right!" said Scully, deferentially. The cowboy and the
Easterner exchanged glances of wonder.

The five chairs were formed in a crescent about one side of the stove.
The Swede began to talk; he talked arrogantly, profanely, angrily.
Johnnie, the cowboy, and the Easterner maintained a morose silence,
while old Scully appeared to be receptive and eager, breaking in
constantly with sympathetic ejaculations.

Finally the Swede announced that he was thirsty. He moved in his
chair, and said that he would go for a drink of water.

"I'll git it for you," cried Scully at once.

"No," said the Swede, contemptuously. "I'll get it for myself." He
arose and stalked with the air of an owner off into the executive
parts of the hotel.

As soon as the Swede was out of hearing Scully sprang to his feet and
whispered intensely to the others: "Up-stairs he thought I was tryin'
to poison 'im."

"Say," said Johnnie, "this makes me sick. Why don't you throw 'im out
in the snow?"

"Why, he's all right now," declared Scully. "It was only that he was
from the East, and he thought this was a tough place. That's all. He's
all right now."

The cowboy looked with admiration upon the Easterner. "You were
straight," he said. "You were on to that there Dutchman."

"Well," said Johnnie to his father, "he may be all right now, but I
don't see it. Other time he was scared, but now he's too fresh."

Scully's speech was always a combination of Irish brogue and idiom,
Western twang and idiom, and scraps of curiously formal diction taken
from the story-books and newspapers, He now hurled a strange mass of
language at the head of his son. "What do I keep? What do I keep? What
do I keep?" he demanded, in a voice of thunder. He slapped his knee
impressively, to indicate that he himself was going to make reply, and
that all should heed. "I keep a hotel," he shouted. "A hotel, do you
mind? A guest under my roof has sacred privileges. He is to be
intimidated by none. Not one word shall he hear that would prejudice
him in favor of goin' away. I'll not have it. There's no place in this
here town where they can say they iver took in a guest of mine because
he was afraid to stay here." He wheeled suddenly upon the cowboy and
the Easterner. "Am I right?"

"Yes, Mr. Scully," said the cowboy, "I think you're right."

"Yes, Mr. Scully," said the Easterner, "I think you're right."



V

At six-o'clock supper, the Swede fizzed like a fire-wheel. He
sometimes seemed on the point of bursting into riotous song, and in
all his madness he was encouraged by old Scully. The Easterner was
incased in reserve; the cowboy sat in wide-mouthed amazement,
forgetting to eat, while Johnnie wrathily demolished great plates of
food. The daughters of the house, when they were obliged to replenish
the biscuits, approached as warily as Indians, and, having succeeded
in their purpose, fled with ill-concealed trepidation. The Swede
domineered the whole feast, and he gave it the appearance of a cruel
bacchanal. He seemed to have grown suddenly taller; he gazed, brutally
disdainful, into every face. His voice rang through the room. Once
when he jabbed out harpoon-fashion with his fork to pinion a biscuit,
the weapon nearly impaled the hand of the Easterner which had been
stretched quietly out for the same biscuit.

After supper, as the men filed towards the other room, the Swede smote
Scully ruthlessly on the shoulder. "Well, old boy, that was a good,
square meal." Johnnie looked hopefully at his father; he knew that
shoulder was tender from an old fall; and, indeed, it appeared for a
moment as if Scully was going to flame out over the matter, but in the
end he smiled a sickly smile and remained silent. The others
understood from his manner that he was admitting his responsibility
for the Swede's new view-point.

Johnnie, however, addressed his parent in an aside. "Why don't you
license somebody to kick you down-stairs?" Scully scowled darkly by
way of reply.

When they were gathered about the stove, the Swede insisted on another
game of High Five. Scully gently deprecated the plan at first, but the
Swede turned a wolfish glare upon him. The old man subsided, and the
Swede canvassed the others. In his tone there was always a great
threat. The cowboy and the Easterner both remarked indifferently that
they would play. Scully said that he would presently have to go to
meet the 6.58 train, and so the Swede turned menacingly upon Johnnie.
For a moment their glances crossed like blades, and then Johnnie
smiled and said, "Yes, I'll play."

They formed a square, with the little board on their knees. The
Easterner and the Swede were again partners. As the play went on, it
was noticeable that the cowboy was not board-whacking as usual.
Meanwhile, Scully, near the lamp, had put on his spectacles and, with
an appearance curiously like an old priest, was reading a newspaper.
In time he went out to meet the 6.58 train, and, despite his
precautions, a gust of polar wind whirled into the room as he opened
the door. Besides scattering the cards, it dulled the players to the
marrow. The Swede cursed frightfully. When Scully returned, his
entrance disturbed a cosey and friendly scene. The Swede again cursed.
But presently they were once more intent, their heads bent forward and
their hands moving swiftly. The Swede had adopted the fashion of
board-whacking.

Scully took up his paper and for a long time remained immersed in
matters which were extraordinarily remote from him. The lamp burned
badly, and once he stopped to adjust the wick. The newspaper, as he
turned from page to page, rustled with a slow and comfortable sound.
Then suddenly he heard three terrible words: "You are cheatin'!"

Such scenes often prove that there can be little of dramatic import in
environment. Any room can present a tragic front; any room can be
comic. This little den was now hideous as a torture-chamber. The new
faces of the men themselves had changed it upon the instant. The Swede
held a huge fist in front of Johnnie's face, while the latter looked
steadily over it into the blazing orbs of his accuser. The Easterner
had grown pallid; the cowboy's jaw had dropped in that expression of
bovine amazement which was one of his important mannerisms. After the
three words, the first sound in the room was made by Scully's paper as
it floated forgotten to his feet. His spectacles had also fallen from
his nose, but by a clutch he had saved them in air. His hand, grasping
the spectacles, now remained poised awkwardly and near his shoulder.
He stared at the card-players.

Probably the silence was while a second elapsed. Then, if the floor
had been suddenly twitched out from under the men they could not have
moved quicker. The five had projected themselves headlong towards a
common point. It happened that Johnnie, in rising to hurl himself upon
the Swede, had stumbled slightly because of his curiously instinctive
care for the cards and the board. The loss of the moment allowed time
for the arrival of Scully, and also allowed the cowboy time to give
the Swede a great push which sent him staggering back. The men found
tongue together, and hoarse shouts of rage, appeal, or fear burst from
every throat. The cowboy pushed and jostled feverishly at the Swede,
and the Easterner and Scully clung wildly to Johnnie; but, through the
smoky air, above the swaying bodies of the peace-compellers, the eyes
of the two warriors ever sought each other in glances of challenge
that were at once hot and steely.

Of course the board had been overturned, and now the whole company of
cards was scattered over the floor, where the boots of the men
trampled the fat and painted kings and queens as they gazed with their
silly eyes at the war that was waging above them.

Scully's voice was dominating the yells. "Stop now? Stop, I say! Stop,
now--"

Johnnie, as he struggled to burst through the rank formed by Scully
and the Easterner, was crying, "Well, he says I cheated! He says I
cheated! I won't allow no man to say I cheated! If he says I cheated,
he's a ------ ------!"

The cowboy was telling the Swede, "Quit, now! Quit, d'ye hear--"

The screams of the Swede never ceased: "He did cheat! I saw him! I saw
him--"

As for the Easterner, he was importuning in a voice that was not
heeded: "Wait a moment, can't you? Oh, wait a moment. What's the good
of a fight over a game of cards? Wait a moment--"

In this tumult no complete sentences were clear. "Cheat"--"Quit"--"He
says"--these fragments pierced the uproar and rang out sharply. It was
remarkable that, whereas Scully undoubtedly made the most noise, he
was the least heard of any of the riotous band.

Then suddenly there was a great cessation. It was as if each man had
paused for breath; and although the room was still lighted with the
anger of men, it could be seen that there was no danger of immediate
conflict, and at once Johnnie, shouldering his way forward, almost
succeeded in confronting the Swede. "What did you say I cheated for?
What did you say I cheated for? I don't cheat, and I won't let no man
say I do!"

The Swede said, "I saw you! I saw you!"

"Well," cried Johnnie, "I'll fight any man what says I cheat!"

"No, you won't," said the cowboy. "Not here."

"Ah, be still, can't you?" said Scully, coming between them.

The quiet was sufficient to allow the Easterner's voice to be heard.
He was repealing, "Oh, wait a moment, can't you? What's the good of a
fight over a game of cards? Wait a moment!"

Johnnie, his red face appearing above his father's shoulder, hailed
the Swede again. "Did you say I cheated?"

The Swede showed his teeth. "Yes."

"Then," said Johnnie, "we must fight."

"Yes, fight," roared the Swede. He was like a demoniac. "Yes, fight!
I'll show you what kind of a man I am! I'll show you who you want to
fight! Maybe you think I can't fight! Maybe you think I can't! I'll
show you, you skin, you card-sharp! Yes, you cheated! You cheated! You
cheated!"

"Well, let's go at it, then, mister," said Johnnie, coolly.

The cowboy's brow was beaded with sweat from his efforts in
intercepting all sorts of raids. He turned in despair to Scully. "What
are you goin' to do now?"

A change had come over the Celtic visage of the old man. He now seemed
all eagerness; his eyes glowed.

"We'll let them fight," he answered, stalwartly. "I can't put up with
it any longer. I've stood this damned Swede till I'm sick. We'll let
them fight."



VI

The men prepared to go out-of-doors. The Easterner was so nervous that
he had great difficulty in getting his arms into the sleeves of his
new leather coat. As the cowboy drew his fur cap down over his cars
his hands trembled. In fact, Johnnie and old Scully were the only ones
who displayed no agitation. These preliminaries were conducted without
words.

Scully threw open the door. "Well, come on," he said. Instantly a
terrific wind caused the flame of the lamp to struggle at its wick,
while a puff of black smoke sprang from the chimney-top. The stove was
in mid-current of the blast, and its voice swelled to equal the roar
of the storm. Some of the scarred and bedabbled cards were caught up
from the floor and dashed helplessly against the farther wall. The men
lowered their heads and plunged into the tempest as into a sea.

No snow was falling, but great whirls and clouds of flakes, swept up
from the ground by the frantic winds, were streaming southward with
the speed of bullets. The covered land was blue with the sheen of an
unearthly satin, and there was no other hue save where, at the low,
black railway station--which seemed incredibly distant--one light
gleamed like a tiny jewel. As the men floundered into a thigh deep
drift, it was known that the Swede was bawling out something. Scully
went to him, put a hand on his shoulder and projected an ear. "What's
that you say?" he shouted.

"I say," bawled the Swede again, "I won't stand much show against this
gang. I know you'll all pitch on me."

Scully smote him reproachfully on the arm. "Tut, man!" he yelled. The
wind tore the words from Scully's lips and scattered them far alee.

"You are all a gang of--" boomed the Swede, but the storm also seized
the remainder of this sentence.

Immediately turning their backs upon the wind, the men had swung
around a corner to the sheltered side of the hotel. It was the
function of the little house to preserve here, amid this great
devastation of snow, an irregular V-shape of heavily incrusted grass,
which crackled beneath the feet. One could imagine the great drifts
piled against the windward side. When the party reached the
comparative peace of this spot it was found that the Swede was still
bellowing.

"Oh, I know what kind of a thing this is! I know you'll all pitch on
me. I can't lick you all!"

Scully turned upon him panther fashion. "You'll not have to whip all
of us. You'll have to whip my son Johnnie. An' the man what troubles
you durin' that time will have me to dale with."

The arrangements were swiftly made. The two men faced each other,
obedient to the harsh commands of Scully, whose face, in the subtly
luminous gloom, could be seen set in the austere impersonal lines that
are pictured on the countenances of the Roman veterans. The
Easterner's teeth were chattering, and he was hopping up and down like
a mechanical toy. The cowboy stood rock-like.

The contestants had not stripped off any clothing. Each was in his
ordinary attire. Their fists were up, and they eyed each other in a
calm that had the elements of leonine cruelty in it.

During this pause, the Easterner's mind, like a film, took lasting
impressions of three men--the iron-nerved master of the ceremony; the
Swede, pale, motionless, terrible; and Johnnie, serene yet ferocious,
brutish yet heroic. The entire prelude had in it a tragedy greater
than the tragedy of action, and this aspect was accentuated by the
long, mellow cry of the blizzard, as it sped the tumbling and wailing
flakes into the black abyss of the south.

"Now!" said Scully.

The two combatants leaped forward and crashed together like bullocks.
There was heard the cushioned sound of blows, and of a curse squeezing
out from between the tight teeth of one.

As for the spectators, the Easterner's pent-up breath exploded from
him with a pop of relief, absolute relief from the tension of the
preliminaries. The cowboy bounded into the air with a yowl. Scully was
immovable as from supreme amazement and fear at the fury of the fight
which he himself had permitted and arranged.

For a time the encounter in the darkness was such a perplexity of
flying arms that it presented no more detail than would a swiftly
revolving wheel. Occasionally a face, as if illumined by a flash of
light, would shine out, ghastly and marked with pink spots. A moment
later, the men might have been known as shadows, if it were not for
the involuntary utterance of oaths that came from them in whispers.

Suddenly a holocaust of warlike desire caught the cowboy, and he
bolted forward with the speed of a broncho. "Go it, Johnnie! go it!
Kill him! Kill him!"

Scully confronted him. "Kape back," he said; and by his glance the
cowboy could tell that this man was Johnnie's father.

To the Easterner there was a monotony of unchangeable fighting that
was an abomination. This confused mingling was eternal to his sense,
which was concentrated in a longing for the end, the priceless end.
Once the fighters lurched near him, and as he scrambled hastily
backward he heard them breathe like men on the rack.

"Kill him, Johnnie! Kill him! Kill him! Kill him!" The cowboy's face
was contorted like one of those agony masks in museums.

"Keep still," said Scully, icily.

Then there was a sudden loud grunt, incomplete, cut short, and
Johnnie's body swung away from the Swede and fell with sickening
heaviness to the grass. The cowboy was barely in time to prevent the
mad Swede from flinging himself upon his prone adversary. "No, you
don't," said the cowboy, interposing an arm. "Wait a second."

Scully was at his son's side. "Johnnie! Johnnie, me boy!" His voice
had a quality of melancholy tenderness. "Johnnie! Can you go on with
it?" He looked anxiously down into the bloody, pulpy face of his son.

There was a moment of silence, and then Johnnie answered in his
ordinary voice, "Yes, I--it--yes."

Assisted by his father he struggled to his feet. "Wait a bit now till
you git your wind," said the old man.

A few paces away the cowboy was lecturing the Swede. "No, you don't!
Wait a second!"

The Easterner was plucking at Scully's sleeve. "Oh, this is enough,"
he pleaded. "This is enough! Let it go as it stands. This is enough!"

"Bill," said Scully, "git out of the road." The cowboy stepped aside.
"Now." The combatants were actuated by a new caution as they advanced
towards collision. They glared at each other, and then the Swede aimed
a lightning blow that carried with it his entire weight. Johnnie was
evidently half stupid from weakness, but he miraculously dodged, and
his fist sent the over-balanced Swede sprawling.

The cowboy, Scully, and the Easterner burst into a cheer that was like
a chorus of triumphant soldiery, but before its conclusion the Swede
had scuffled agilely to his feet and come in berserk abandon at his
foe. There was another perplexity of flying arms, and Johnnie's body
again swung away and fell, even as a bundle might fall from a roof.
The Swede instantly staggered to a little wind-waved tree and leaned
upon it, breathing like an engine, while his savage and flame-lit eyes
roamed from face to face as the men bent over Johnnie. There was a
splendor of isolation in his situation at this time which the
Easterner felt once when, lifting his eyes from the man on the ground,
he beheld that mysterious and lonely figure, waiting.

"Arc you any good yet, Johnnie?" asked Scully in a broken voice.

The son gasped and opened his eyes languidly. After a moment he
answered, "No--I ain't--any good--any--more." Then, from shame and
bodily ill he began to weep, the tears furrowing down through the
blood-stains on his face. "He was too--too--too heavy for me."

Scully straightened and addressed the waiting figure. "Stranger," he
said, evenly, "it's all up with our side." Then his voice changed into
that vibrant huskiness which is commonly the tone of the most simple
and deadly announcements. "Johnnie is whipped."

Without replying, the victor moved off on the route to the front door
of the hotel.

The cowboy was formulating new and un-spellable blasphemies. The
Easterner was startled to find that they were out in a wind that
seemed to come direct from the shadowed arctic floes. He heard again
the wail of the snow as it was flung to its grave in the south. He
knew now that all this time the cold had been sinking into him deeper
and deeper, and he wondered that he had not perished. He felt
indifferent to the condition of the vanquished man.

"Johnnie, can you walk?" asked Scully.

"Did I hurt--hurt him any?" asked the son.

"Can you walk, boy? Can you walk?"

Johnnie's voice was suddenly strong. There was a robust impatience in
it. "I asked you whether I hurt him any!"

"Yes, yes, Johnnie," answered the cowboy, consolingly; "he's hurt a
good deal."

They raised him from the ground, and as soon as he was on his feet he
went tottering off, rebuffing all attempts at assistance. When the
party rounded the corner they were fairly blinded by the pelting of
the snow. It burned their faces like fire. The cowboy carried Johnnie
through the drift to the door. As they entered some cards again rose
from the floor and beat against the wall.

The Easterner rushed to the stove. He was so profoundly chilled that
he almost dared to embrace the glowing iron. The Swede was not in the
room. Johnnie sank into a chair, and, folding his arms on his knees,
buried his face in them. Scully, warming one foot and then the other
at a rim of the stove, muttered to himself with Celtic mournfulness.
The cowboy had removed his fur cap, and with a dazed and rueful air he
was running one hand through his tousled locks. From overhead they
could hear the creaking of boards, as the Swede tramped here and there
in his room.

The sad quiet was broken by the sudden flinging open of a door that
led towards the kitchen. It was instantly followed by an inrush of
women. They precipitated themselves upon Johnnie amid a chorus of
lamentation. Before they carried their prey off to the kitchen, there
to be bathed and harangued with that mixture of sympathy and abuse
which is a feat of their sex, the mother straightened herself and
fixed old Scully with an eye of stern reproach. "Shame be upon you,
Patrick Scully!" she cried. "Your own son, too. Shame be upon you!"

"There, now! Be quiet, now!" said the old man, weakly.

"Shame be upon you, Patrick Scully!" The girls, rallying to this
slogan, sniffed disdainfully in the direction of those trembling
accomplices, the cowboy and the Easterner. Presently they bore Johnnie
away, and left the three men to dismal reflection.



VII

"I'd like to fight this here Dutchman myself," said the cowboy,
breaking a long silence.

Scully wagged his head sadly. "No, that wouldn't do. It wouldn't be
right. It wouldn't be right."

"Well, why wouldn't it?" argued the cowboy. "I don't see no harm in
it."

"No," answered Scully, with mournful heroism. "It wouldn't be right.
It was Johnnie's fight, and now we mustn't whip the man just because
he whipped Johnnie."

"Yes, that's true enough," said the cowboy; "but--he better not get
fresh with me, because I couldn't stand no more of it."

"You'll not say a word to him," commanded Scully, and even then they
heard the tread of the Swede on the stairs. His entrance was made
theatric. He swept the door back with a bang and swaggered to the
middle of the room. No one looked at him. "Well," he cried,
insolently, at Scully, "I s'pose you'll tell me now how much I owe
you?"

The old man remained stolid. "You don't owe me nothin'."

"Huh!" said the Swede, "huh! Don't owe 'im nothin'."

The cowboy addressed the Swede. "Stranger, I don't see how you come to
be so gay around here."

Old Scully was instantly alert. "Stop!" he shouted, holding his hand
forth, fingers upward. "Bill, you shut up!"

The cowboy spat carelessly into the sawdust box. "I didn't say a word,
did I?" he asked.

"Mr. Scully," called the Swede, "how much do I owe you?" It was seen
that he was attired for departure, and that he had his valise in his
hand.

"You don't owe me nothin'," repeated Scully in his same imperturbable
way.

"Huh!" said the Swede. "I guess you're right. I guess if it was any
way at all, you'd owe me somethin'. That's what I guess." He turned to
the cowboy. "'Kill him! Kill him! Kill him!'" he mimicked, and then
guffawed victoriously. "'Kill him!'" He was convulsed with ironical
humor.

But he might have been jeering the dead. The three men were immovable
and silent, staring with glassy eyes at the stove.

The Swede opened the door and passed into the storm, giving one
derisive glance backward at the still group.

As soon as the door was closed, Scully and the cowboy leaped to their
feet and began to curse. They trampled to and fro, waving their arms
and smashing into the air with their fists. "Oh, but that was a hard
minute!" wailed Scully. "That was a hard minute! Him there leerin' and
scoffin'! One bang at his nose was worth forty dollars to me that
minute! How did you stand it, Bill?"

"How did I stand it?" cried the cowboy in a quivering voice. "How did
I stand it? Oh!"

The old man burst into sudden brogue. "I'd loike to take that Swade,"
he wailed, "and hould 'im down on a shtone flure and bate 'im to a
jelly wid a shtick!"

The cowboy groaned in sympathy. "I'd like to git him by the neck and
ha-ammer him "--he brought his hand down on a chair with a noise like
a pistol-shot--"hammer that there Dutchman until he couldn't tell
himself from a dead coyote!"

"I'd bate 'im until he--"

"I'd show _him_ some things--"

And then together they raised a yearning, fanatic cry--"Oh-o-oh! if we
only could--"

"Yes!"

"Yes!"

"And then I'd--"

"O-o-oh!"



VIII

The Swede, tightly gripping his valise, tacked across the face of the
storm as if he carried sails. He was following a line of little naked,
gasping trees, which he knew must mark the way of the road. His face,
fresh from the pounding of Johnnie's fists, felt more pleasure than
pain in the wind and the driving snow. A number of square shapes
loomed upon him finally, and he knew them as the houses of the main
body of the town. He found a street and made travel along it, leaning
heavily upon the wind whenever, at a corner, a terrific blast caught
him.

He might have been in a deserted village. We picture the world as
thick with conquering and elate humanity, but here, with the bugles of
the tempest pealing, it was hard to imagine a peopled earth. One
viewed the existence of man then as a marvel, and conceded a glamour
of wonder to these lice which were caused to cling to a whirling,
fire-smote, ice-locked, disease-stricken, space-lost bulb. The conceit
of man was explained by this storm to be the very engine of life. One
was a coxcomb not to die in it. However, the Swede found a saloon.

In front of it an indomitable red light was burning, and the
snow-flakes were made blood color as they flew through the
circumscribed territory of the lamp's shining. The Swede pushed open
the door of the saloon and entered. A sanded expanse was before him,
and at the end of it four men sat about a table drinking. Down one
side of the room extended a radiant bar, and its guardian was leaning
upon his elbows listening to the talk of the men at the table. The
Swede dropped his valise upon the floor, and, smiling fraternally upon
the barkeeper, said, "Gimme some whiskey, will you?" The man placed a
bottle, a whiskey-glass, and a glass of ice-thick water upon the bar.
The Swede poured himself an abnormal portion of whiskey and drank it
in three gulps. "Pretty bad night," remarked the bartender,
indifferently. He was making the pretension of blindness which is
usually a distinction of his class; but it could have been seen that
he was furtively studying the half-erased blood-stains on the face of
the Swede. "Bad night," he said again.

"Oh, it's good enough for me," replied the Swede, hardily, as he
poured himself some more whiskey. The barkeeper took his coin and
maneuvered it through its reception by the highly nickelled
cash-machine. A bell rang; a card labelled "20 cts." had appeared.

"No," continued the Swede, "this isn't too bad weather. It's good
enough for me."

"So?" murmured the barkeeper, languidly.

The copious drams made the Swede's eyes swim, and he breathed a trifle
heavier. "Yes, I like this weather. I like it. It suits me." It was
apparently his design to impart a deep significance to these words.

"So?" murmured the bartender again. He turned to gaze dreamily at the
scroll-like birds and bird-like scrolls which had been drawn with soap
upon the mirrors back of the bar.

"Well, I guess I'll take another drink," said the Swede, presently.
"Have something?"

"No, thanks; I'm not drinkin'," answered the bartender. Afterwards he
asked, "How did you hurt your face?"

The Swede immediately began to boast loudly. "Why, in a fight. I
thumped the soul out of a man down here at Scully's hotel."

The interest of the four men at the table was at last aroused.

"Who was it?" said one.

"Johnnie Scully," blustered the Swede. "Son of the man what runs it.
He will be pretty near dead for some weeks, I can tell you. I made a
nice thing of him, I did. He couldn't get up. They carried him in the
house. Have a drink?"

Instantly the men in some subtle way incased themselves in reserve.
"No, thanks," said one. The group was of curious formation. Two were
prominent local business men; one was the district-attorney; and one
was a professional gambler of the kind known as "square." But a
scrutiny of the group would not have enabled an observer to pick the
gambler from the men of more reputable pursuits. He was, in fact, a
man so delicate in manner, when among people of fair class, and so
judicious in his choice of victims, that in the strictly masculine
part of the town's life he had come to be explicitly trusted and
admired. People called him a thoroughbred. The fear and contempt with
which his craft was regarded was undoubtedly the reason that his quiet
dignity shone conspicuous above the quiet dignity of men who might be
merely hatters, billiard markers, or grocery-clerks. Beyond an
occasional unwary traveller, who came by rail, this gambler was
supposed to prey solely upon reckless and senile farmers, who, when
flush with good crops, drove into town in all the pride and confidence
of an absolutely invulnerable stupidity. Hearing at times in
circuitous fashion of the despoilment of such a farmer, the important
men of Romper invariably laughed in contempt of the victim, and, if
they thought of the wolf at all, it was with a kind of pride at the
knowledge that he would never dare think of attacking their wisdom and
courage. Besides, it was popular that this gambler had a real wife and
two real children in a neat cottage in a suburb, where he led an
exemplary home life; and when any one even suggested a discrepancy in
his character, the crowd immediately vociferated descriptions of this
virtuous family circle. Then men who led exemplary home lives, and men
who did not lead exemplary home lives, all subsided in a bunch,
remarking that there was nothing more to be said.

However, when a restriction was placed upon him--as, for instance,
when a strong clique of members of the new Pollywog Club refused to
permit him, even as a spectator, to appear in the rooms of the
organization--the candor and gentleness with which he accepted the
judgment disarmed many of his foes and made his friends more
desperately partisan. He invariably distinguished between himself and
a respectable Romper man so quickly and frankly that his manner
actually appeared to be a continual broadcast compliment.

And one must not forget to declare the fundamental fact of his entire
position in Romper. It is irrefutable that in all affairs outside of
his business, in all matters that occur eternally and commonly between
man and man, this thieving card-player was so generous, so just, so
moral, that, in a contest, he could have put to flight the consciences
of nine-tenths of the citizens of Romper.

And so it happened that he was seated in this saloon with the two
prominent local merchants and the district-attorney.

The Swede continued to drink raw whiskey, meanwhile babbling at the
barkeeper and trying to induce him to indulge in potations. "Come on.
Have a drink. Come on. What--no? Well, have a little one, then. By
gawd, I've whipped a man to-night, and I want to celebrate. I whipped
him good, too. Gentlemen," the Swede cried to the men at the table,
"have a drink?"

"Ssh!" said the barkeeper.

The group at the table, although furtively attentive, had been
pretending to be deep in talk, but now a man lifted his eyes towards
the Swede and said, shortly, "Thanks. We don't want any more."

At this reply the Swede ruffled out his chest like a rooster. "Well,"
he exploded, "it seems I can't get anybody to drink with me in this
town. Seems so, don't it? Well!"

"Ssh!" said the barkeeper.

"Say," snarled the Swede, "don't you try to shut me up. I won't have
it. I'm a gentleman, and I want people to drink with me. And I want
'em to drink with me now. _Now_--do you understand?" He rapped the bar
with his knuckles.

Years of experience had calloused the bartender. He merely grew sulky.
"I hear you," he answered.

"Well," cried the Swede, "listen hard then. See those men over there?
Well, they're going to drink with me, and don't you forget it. Now you
watch."

"Hi!" yelled the barkeeper, "this won't do!"

"Why won't it?" demanded the Swede. He stalked over to the table, and
by chance laid his hand upon the shoulder of the gambler. "How about
this?" he asked, wrathfully. "I asked you to drink with me."

The gambler simply twisted his head and spoke over his shoulder. "My
friend, I don't know you."

"Oh, hell!" answered the Swede, "come and have a drink."

"Now, my boy," advised the gambler, kindly, "take your hand off my
shoulder and go 'way and mind your own business." He was a little,
slim man, and it seemed strange to hear him use this tone of heroic
patronage to the burly Swede. The other men at the table said nothing.

"What! You won't drink with me, you little dude? I'll make you then!
I'll make you!" The Swede had grasped the gambler frenziedly at the
throat, and was dragging him from his chair. The other men sprang up.
The barkeeper dashed around the corner of his bar. There was a great
tumult, and then was seen a long blade in the hand of the gambler. It
shot forward, and a human body, this citadel of virtue, wisdom, power,
was pierced as easily as if it had been a melon. The Swede fell with a
cry of supreme astonishment.

The prominent merchants and the district attorney must have at once
tumbled out of the place backward. The bartender found himself hanging
limply to the arm of a chair and gazing into the eyes of a murderer.

"Henry," said the latter, as he wiped his knife on one of the towels
that hung beneath the bar-rail, "you tell 'em where to find me. I'll
be home, waiting for 'em." Then he vanished. A moment afterwards the
barkeeper was in the street dinning through the storm for help, and,
moreover, companionship.

The corpse of the Swede, alone in the saloon, had its eyes fixed upon
a dreadful legend that dwelt atop of the cash-machine: "This registers
the amount of your purchase."



IX

Months later, the cowboy was frying pork over the stove of a little
ranch near the Dakota line, when there was a quick thud of hoofs
outside, and presently the Easterner entered with the letters and the
papers.

"Well," said the Easterner at once, "the chap that killed the Swede
has got three years. Wasn't much, was it?"

"He has? Three years?" The cowboy poised his pan of pork, while he
ruminated upon the news. "Three years. That ain't much."

"No. It was a light sentence," replied the Easterner as he unbuckled
his spurs. "Seems there was a good deal of sympathy for him in
Romper."

"If the bartender had been any good," observed the cowboy,
thoughtfully, "he would have gone in and cracked that there Dutchman
on the head with a bottle in the beginnin' of it and stopped all this
here murderin'."

"Yes, a thousand things might have happened," said the Easterner,
tartly.

The cowboy returned his pan of pork to the fire, but his philosophy
continued. "It's funny, ain't it? If he hadn't said Johnnie was
cheatin' he'd be alive this minute. He was an awful fool. Game played
for fun, too. Not for money. I believe he was crazy."

"I feel sorry for that gambler," said the Easterner.

"Oh, so do I," said the cowboy. "He don't deserve none of it for
killin' who he did."

"The Swede might not have been killed if everything had been square."

"Might not have been killed?" exclaimed the cowboy. "Everythin'
square? Why, when he said that Johnnie was cheatin' and acted like
such a jackass? And then in the saloon he fairly walked up to git
hurt?" With these arguments the cowboy browbeat the Easterner and
reduced him to rage.

"You're a fool!" cried the Easterner, viciously. "You're a bigger
jackass than the Swede by a million majority. Now let me tell you one
thing. Let me tell you something. Listen! Johnnie _was_ cheating!"

"'Johnnie,'" said the cowboy, blankly. There was a minute of silence,
and then he said, robustly, "Why, no. The game was only for fun."

"Fun or not," said the Easterner, "Johnnie was cheating. I saw him. I
know it. I saw him. And I refused to stand up and be a man. I let the
Swede fight it out alone. And you--you were simply puffing around the
place and wanting to fight. And then old Scully himself! We are all in
it! This poor gambler isn't even a noun. He is kind of an adverb.
Every sin is the result of a collaboration. We, five of us, have
collaborated in the murder of this Swede. Usually there are from a
dozen to forty women really involved in every murder, but in this case
it seems to be only five men--you, I, Johnnie, old Scully, and that
fool of an unfortunate gambler came merely as a culmination, the apex
of a human movement, and gets all the punishment."

The cowboy, injured and rebellious, cried out blindly into this fog of
mysterious theory: "Well, I didn't do anythin', did I?"



------




HIS NEW MITTENS


I

Little Horace was walking home from school, brilliantly decorated by a
pair of new red mittens. A number of boys were snowballing gleefully
in a field. They hailed him. "Come on, Horace! We're having a battle."

[Illustration: "Little Horace"]

Horace was sad. "No," he said, "I can't. I've got to go home." At noon
his mother had admonished him: "Now, Horace, you come straight home as
soon as school is out. Do you hear? And don't you get them nice new
mittens all wet, either. Do you hear?" Also his aunt had said: "I
declare, Emily, it's a shame the way you allow that child to ruin his
things." She had meant mittens. To his mother, Horace had dutifully
replied, "Yes'm." But he now loitered in the vicinity of the group of
uproarious boys, who were yelling like hawks as the white balls flew.

[Illustration: "...Yelling Like Hawks as the White Balls Flew"]

Some of them immediately analyzed this extraordinary hesitancy.
"Hah!" they paused to scoff, "afraid of your new mittens, ain't you?"
Some smaller boys, who were not yet so wise in discerning motives,
applauded this attack with unreasonable vehemence. "A-fray-ed of his
mit-tens! A-fray-ed of his mit-tens." They sang these lines to cruel
and monotonous music which is as old perhaps as American childhood,
and which it is the privilege of the emancipated adult to completely
forget. "Afray-ed of his mit-tens!"

Horace cast a tortured glance towards his playmates, and then dropped
his eyes to the snow at his feet. Presently he turned to the trunk of
one of the great maple-trees that lined the curb. He made a pretence
of closely examining the rough and virile bark. To his mind, this
familiar street of Whilomville seemed to grow dark in the thick shadow
of shame. The trees and the houses were now palled in purple.

"A-fray-ed of his mit-tens!" The terrible music had in it a meaning
from the moonlit war-drums of chanting cannibals.

[Illustration: "Horace: I've got to go home."]

At last Horace, with supreme effort, raised his head. "'Tain't them I
care about," he said, gruffly. "I've got to go home. That's all."

Whereupon each boy held his left forefinger as if it were a pencil and
began to sharpen it derisively with his right forefinger. They came
closer, and sang like a trained chorus, "A-fray-ed of his mittens!"

When he raised his voice to deny the charge it was simply lost in the
screams of the mob. He was alone, fronting all the traditions of
boyhood held before him by inexorable representatives. To such a low
state had he fallen that one lad, a mere baby, outflanked him and then
struck him in the cheek with a heavy snowball. The act was acclaimed
with loud jeers. Horace turned to dart at his assailant, but there was
an immediate demonstration on the other flank, and he found himself
obliged to keep his face towards the hilarious crew of tormentors. The
baby retreated in safety to the rear of the crowd, where he was
received with fulsome compliments upon his daring. Horace retreated
slowly up the walk. He continually tried to make them heed him, but
the only sound was the chant, "A-fray-ed of his mit-tens!" In this
desperate withdrawal the beset and haggard boy suffered more than is
the common lot of man.

[Illustration: "When He Raised His Voice to Deny the Charge"]

Being a boy himself, he did not understand boys at all. He had, of
course, the dismal conviction that they were going to dog him to his
grave. But near the corner of the field they suddenly seemed to forget
all about it. Indeed, they possessed only the malevolence of so many
flitter-headed sparrows. The interest had swung capriciously to some
other matter. In a moment they were off in the field again, carousing
amid the snow. Some authoritative boy had probably said, "Aw, come
on!"

[Illustration: "Aw, Come On!"]

As the pursuit ceased, Horace ceased his retreat. He spent some time
in what was evidently an attempt to adjust his self respect, and then
began to wander furtively down towards the group. He, too, had
undergone an important change. Perhaps his sharp agony was only as
durable as the malevolence of the others. In this boyish life
obedience to some unformulated creed of manners was enforced with
capricious but merciless rigor. However, they were, after all, his
comrades, his friends.

They did not heed his return. They were engaged in an altercation. It
had evidently been planned that this battle was between Indians and
soldiers. The smaller and weaker boys had been induced to appear as
Indians in the initial skirmish, but they were now very sick of it,
and were reluctantly but steadfastly, affirming their desire for a
change of caste. The larger boys had all won great distinction,
devastating Indians materially, and they wished the war to go on as
planned. They explained vociferously that it was proper for the
soldiers always to thrash the Indians. The little boys did not pretend
to deny the truth of this argument; they confined themselves to the
simple statement that, in that case, they wished to be soldiers. Each
little boy willingly appealed to the others to remain Indians, but as
for himself he reiterated his desire to enlist as a soldier. The
larger boys were in despair over this dearth of enthusiasm in the
small Indians. They alternately wheedled and bullied, but they could
not persuade the little boys, who were really suffering dreadful
humiliation rather than submit to another onslaught of soldiers. They
were called all the baby names that had the power of stinging deep
into their pride, but they remained firm.

Then a formidable lad, a leader of reputation, one who could whip many
boys that wore long trousers, suddenly blew out his checks and
shouted, "Well, all right then. I'll be an Indian myself. Now." The
little boys greeted with cheers this addition to their wearied ranks,
and seemed then content. But matters were not mended in the least,
because all of the personal following of the formidable lad, with the
addition of every outsider, spontaneously forsook the flag and
declared themselves Indians. There were now no soldiers. The Indians
had carried everything unanimously. The formidable lad used his
influence, but his influence could not shake the loyalty of his
friends, who refused to fight under any colors but his colors.

Plainly there was nothing for it but to coerce the little ones. The
formidable lad again became a soldier, and then graciously permitted
to join him all the real fighting strength of the crowd, leaving
behind a most forlorn band of little Indians. Then the soldiers
attacked the Indians, exhorting them to opposition at the same time.

The Indians at first adopted a policy of hurried surrender, but this
had no success, as none of the surrenders were accepted. They then
turned to flee, bawling out protests. The ferocious soldiers pursued
them amid shouts. The battle widened, developing all manner of
marvellous detail.

Horace had turned towards home several times, but, as a matter of
fact, this scene held him in a spell. It was fascinating beyond
anything which the grown man understands. He had always in the back of
his head a sense of guilt, even a sense of impending punishment for
disobedience, but they could not weigh with the delirium of this
snow-battle.



II

One of the raiding soldiers, espying Horace, called out in passing,
"A-fray-ed of his mit-tens!" Horace flinched at this renewal, and the
other lad paused to taunt him again. Horace scooped some snow, moulded
it into a ball, and flung it at the other. "Ho!" cried the boy,
"you're an Indian, are you? Hey, fellers, here's an Indian that ain't
been killed yet." He and Horace engaged in a duel in which both were
in such haste to mould snowballs that they had little time for aiming.

Horace once struck his opponent squarely in the chest. "Hey," he
shouted, "you're dead. You can't fight any more, Pete. I killed you.
You're dead."

The other boy flushed red, but he continued frantically to make
ammunition. "You never touched me!" he retorted, glowering. "You never
touched me! Where, now?" he added, defiantly. "Where did you hit me?"

"On the coat! Right on your breast! You can't fight any more! You're
dead!"

"You never!"

"I did, too! Hey, fellers, ain't he dead? I hit 'im square!"

"He never!"

Nobody had seen the affair, but some of the boys took sides in
absolute accordance with their friendship for one of the concerned
parties. Horace's opponent went about contending, "He never touched
me! He never came near me! He never came near me!"

The formidable leader now came forward and accosted Horace. "What was
you? An Indian? Well, then, you're dead--that's all. He hit you. I saw
him."

"Me?" shrieked Horace. "He never came within a mile of me----"

At that moment he heard his name called in a certain familiar tune of
two notes, with the last note shrill and prolonged. He looked towards
the sidewalk, and saw his mother standing there in her widow's weeds,
with two brown paper parcels under her arm. A silence had fallen upon
all the boys. Horace moved slowly towards his mother. She did not seem
to note his approach; she was gazing austerely off through the naked
branches of the maples where two crimson sunset bars lay on the deep
blue sky.

At a distance of ten paces Horace made a desperate venture. "Oh, ma,"
he whined, "can't I stay out for a while?"

"No," she answered solemnly, "you come with me." Horace knew that
profile; it was the inexorable profile. But he continued to plead,
because it was not beyond his mind that a great show of suffering now
might diminish his suffering later.

He did not dare to look back at his playmates. It was already a public
scandal that he could not stay out as late as other boys, and he could
imagine his standing now that he had been again dragged off by his
mother in sight of the whole world. He was a profoundly miserable
human being.

Aunt Martha opened the door for them. Light streamed about her
straight skirt. "Oh," she said, "so you found him on the road, eh?
Well, I declare! It was about time!"

Horace slunk into the kitchen. The stove, straddling out on its four
iron legs, was gently humming. Aunt Martha had evidently just lighted
the lamp, for she went to it and began to twist the wick
experimentally.

[Illustration: "Let's See Them Mittens."]

"Now," said the mother, "let's see them mittens."

Horace's chin sank. The aspiration of the criminal, the passionate
desire for an asylum from retribution, from justice, was aflame in his
heart. "I--I--don't--don't know where they are." he gasped finally, as
he passed his hand over his pockets.

"Horace," intoned his mother, "you are tellin' me a story!"

"'Tain't a story," he answered, just above his breath. He looked like
a sheep-stealer.

His mother held him by the arm, and began to search his pockets.
Almost at once she was able to bring forth a pair of very wet mittens.
"Well, I declare!" cried Aunt Martha. The two women went close to the
lamp, and minutely examined the mittens, turning them over and over.
Afterwards, when Horace looked up, his mother's sad-lined, homely face
was turned towards him. He burst into tears.

His mother drew a chair near the stove. "Just you sit there now, until
I tell you to git off." He sidled meekly into the chair. His mother
and his aunt went briskly about the business of preparing supper. They
did not display a knowledge of his existence; they carried an effect
of oblivion so far that they even did not speak to each other.
Presently they went into the dining and living room; Horace could hear
the dishes rattling. His Aunt Martha brought a plate of food, placed
it on a chair near him, and went away without a word.

[Illustration: "Brought a Plate of Food"]

Horace instantly decided that he would not touch a morsel of the food.
He had often used this ruse in dealing with his mother. He did not
know why it brought her to terms, but certainly it sometimes did.

The mother looked up when the aunt returned to the other room. "Is he
eatin' his supper?" she asked.

The maiden aunt, fortified in ignorance, gazed with pity and contempt
upon this interest. "Well, now, Emily, how do I know?" she queried.
"Was I goin' to stand over 'im? Of all the worryin' you do about that
child! It's a shame the way you're bringin' up that child."

"Well, he ought to eat somethin'. It won't do fer him to go without
eatin'," the mother retorted, weakly.

Aunt Martha, profoundly scorning the policy of concession which these
words meant, uttered a long, contemptuous sigh.



III

Alone in the kitchen, Horace stared with sombre eyes at the plate of
food. For a long time he betrayed no sign of yielding. His mood was
adamantine. He was resolved not to sell his vengeance for bread, cold
ham, and a pickle, and yet it must be known that the sight of them
affected him powerfully. The pickle in particular was notable for its
seductive charm. He surveyed it darkly.

[Illustration: "Horace Stared with Sombre Eyes at the Plate of Food"]

But at last, unable to longer endure his state, his attitude in the
presence of the pickle, he put out an inquisitive finger and touched
it, and it was cool and green and plump. Then a full conception of the
cruel woe of his situation swept upon him suddenly, and his eyes
filled with tears, which began to move down his cheeks. He sniffled.
His heart was black with hatred. He painted in his mind scenes of
deadly retribution. His mother would be taught that he was not one to
endure persecution meekly, without raising an arm in his defence. And
so his dreams were of a slaughter of feelings, and near the end of
them his mother was pictured as coming, bowed with pain, to his feet.
Weeping, she implored his charity. Would he forgive her? No; his once
tender heart had been turned to stone by her injustice. He could not
forgive her. She must pay the inexorable penalty.

The first item in this horrible plan was the refusal of the food. This
he knew by experience would work havoc in his mother's heart. And so
he grimly waited.

But suddenly it occurred to him that the first part of his revenge was
in danger of failing. The thought struck him that his mother might not
capitulate in the usual way. According to his recollection, the time
was more than due when she should come in, worried, sadly
affectionate, and ask him if he was ill. It had then been his custom
to hint in a resigned voice that he was the victim of secret disease,
but that he preferred to suffer in silence and alone. If she was
obdurate in her anxiety, he always asked her in a gloomy, low voice to
go away and leave him to suffer in silence and alone in the darkness
without food. He had known this maneuvering to result even in pie.

But what was the meaning of the long pause and the stillness? Had his
old and valued ruse betrayed him? As the truth sank into his mind, he
supremely loathed life, the world, his mother. Her heart was beating
back the besiegers; he was a defeated child.

He wept for a time before deciding upon the final stroke. He would run
away. In a remote corner of the world he would become some sort of
bloody-handed person driven to a life of crime by the barbarity of his
mother. She should never know his fate. He would torture her for years
with doubts and doubts, and drive her implacably to a repentant grave.
Nor would Aunt Martha escape. Some day, a century hence, when his
mother was dead, he would write to his Aunt Martha, and point out her
part in the blighting of his life. For one blow against him now he
would, in time, deal back a thousand--aye, ten thousand.

[Illustration: "Some Sort of Bloody-Handed Person"]

He arose and took his coat and cap. As he moved stealthily towards the
door he cast a glance backward at the pickle. He was tempted to take
it, but he knew that if he left the plate inviolate his mother would
feel even worse.

A blue snow was falling. People, bowed forward, were moving briskly
along the walks. The electric lamps hummed amid showers of flakes. As
Horace emerged from the kitchen, a shrill squall drove the flakes
around the corner of the house. He cowered away from it, and its
violence illumined his mind vaguely in new directions. He deliberated
upon a choice of remote corners of the globe. He found that he had no
plans which were definite enough in a geographical way, but without
much loss of time he decided upon California. He moved briskly as far
as his mother's front gate on the road to California. He was off at
last. His success was a trifle dreadful; his throat choked.

[Illustration: "People, Bowed Forward"]

But at the gate he paused. He did not know if his journey to
California would be shorter if he went down Niagara Avenue or off
through Hogan Street. As the storm was very cold and the point was
