passeth knowledge. Thus therefore it suits and answers a Christian's
condition, while in this world, let that be what it will. If his
afflictions be broad, here is a breadth; if they be long, here
is a length,; and if they be deep, here is a depth; and if they
be high, here is a height. And I will say, there is nothing that
is more helpful, succouring, or comfortable to a Christian while
in a state of trial and temptation, than to know that there is a
breadth to answer a breadth, a length to answer a length, a depth
to answer a depth, and a height to answer a height. Wherefore this
is it that the Apostle prayeth for, namely, that the Ephesians
might have understanding in these things, "That ye may know what
is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height."

Of the largeness of the Apostle's heart in praying for this people,
to wit, "That they might be able to comprehend with all saints,
what," &c. of that we shall speak afterwards.

But first, to speak to these four expressions, breadth, length,
depth, and height.

First, What is the BREADTH. This word is to shew, that God is
all over, everywhere, spreading of his wings, stretching out his
goodness to the utmost bounds, for the good of those that are his
people (Deu 32:11,12, Gen 49:26).

In the sin of his people there is a breadth; a breadth that spreadeth
over all, wheresoever a man shall look. The sin of the saints is
a spreading leprosy (Lev 13:12). Sin is a scab that spreadeth;
it is a spreading plague; it knows no bounds (Lev 13:8, 57): or,
as David saith, "I have seen the wicked spreading himself" (Psa
37:35). Hence it is compared to a cloud, to a thick cloud, that
covereth or spreadeth over the face of all the sky. Wherefore here
is a breadth called for, a breadth that can cover all, or else
what is done is to no purpose. Therefore to answer this, here we
have a breadth, a spreading breadth; "I spread my skirt over thee":
But how far? Even so far as to cover all. "I spread my skirt over
thee, and covered thy nakedness" (Eze 16:8). Here now is a breadth
according to the spreading nature of the sin of this wretched one;
yea, a super-abounding spreading; a spreading beyond; a spreading
to cover. "Blessed is he whose sin is covered" (Psa 32:1), whose
spreading sin is covered by the mercy of God through Christ (Rom
4:4-7). This is the spreading cloud, whose spreadings none can
understand (Job 36:29). "He spread a cloud for a covering, and
fire to give light in the night" (Psa 105:39).

This breadth that is in God, it also overmatcheth that spreading
and overspreading rage of men, that is sometimes as if it would
swallow up the whole church of God. You read of the rage of the
king of Assyria, that there was a breadth in it, an overflowing
breadth, to the filling of "the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel"
(Isa 8:8). But what follows? "Associate yourselves, O ye people,
[ye Assyrians] and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear,
all ye of far countries; gird yourselves and ye shall be broken
in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought;
speak the word, and it shall not stand, for God is with us" (Isa
8:8-10); God will over-match and go beyond you.

Wherefore this word, breadth, and what is the breadth: It is here
expressed on purpose to succour and relieve, or to shew what
advantage, for support, the knowledge of the overspreading grace of
God by Christ yieldeth unto those that have it, let their trials
be what they will. Alas! the sin of God's children seemeth sometimes
to overspread not only their flesh, and the face of their souls,
but the whole face of heaven. And what shall he do now, that is
a stranger to this breadth, made mention of in the text? Why he
must despair, lie down and die, and shut up his heart against all
comfort, unless he, with his fellow-christians, can, at least,
apprehend what is this breadth, or the breadth of mercy intended
in this place. Therefore Paul for the support of the Ephesians,
prays, that they may know "what is the breadth."

This largeness of the heart and mercy of God towards his people,
is also signified by the spreading out of his hand to us in the
invitations of the gospel. "I said," saith he, "Behold me, behold
me,--I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious
people.--to a people that provoketh me continually" (Isa 65:1-3).

I have spread out my hands, that is, opened my arms as a mother
affectionately doth, when she stoopeth to her child in the warm
workings of her bowels, and claspeth it up in them, and kisseth,
and putteth it into her bosom.

For, by spreading out the hands or arms to embrace, is shewed the
breadth or largeness of God's affections; as by our spreading out
our hands in prayer, is signified the great sense that we have of
the spreading nature of our sins, and of the great desires that
are in us, that God would be merciful to us (Ezra 9:5-7).

This word also answereth to, or may fitly be set against the
wiles and temptations of the devil, who is that great and dogged
Leviathan, that spreadeth his "sharp-pointed things upon the mire"
(Job 41:30): For, be the spreading nature of our corruptions never
so broad, he will find sharp-pointed things enough to stick in
the mire of them, for our affliction. These sharp-pointed things
are those that in another place are called "fiery darts" (Eph 6:16),
and he has abundance of them, with which he can and will sorely
prick and wound our spirits: Yea, so sharp some have found these
things to their souls, that they have pierced beyond expression.
"When," said Job, "I say, my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall
ease my complaint; then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest
me through visions; so that my soul chooseth strangling, and
death rather than my life" (Job 7:13-15). But now, answerable to
the spreading of these sharp-pointed things, there is a super-abounding
breadth in the sovereign grace of God, the which whoso seeth and
understandeth, as the Apostle doth pray we should, is presently
helped: for he seeth that this grace spreadeth itself, and is
broader than can be, either our mire, or the sharp-pointed things
that he spreadeth thereupon for our vexation and affliction: "It
is broader than the sea" (Job 11:9).

This therefore should be that upon which those that see the
spreading nature of sin, and the leprosy and contagion thereof,
should meditate, to wit, The broadness of the grace and mercy
of God in Christ. This will poise and stay the soul; this will
relieve and support the soul in and under those many misgiving
and desponding thoughts unto which we are subject when afflicted
with the apprehensions of sin, and the abounding nature of it.

Shall another man pray for this, one that knew the goodness and
benefit of it, and shall not I meditate upon it? and shall not I
exercise my mind about it? Yes surely, for it is my duty, it is my
privilege and mercy so to do. Let this therefore, when thou seest
the spreading nature of thy sin be a memento to thee, to the end
thou mayest not sink and die in thy soul.

Secondly, What is the breadth and LENGTH. As there is a breadth
in this mercy and grace of God by Christ, so there is a LENGTH
therein, and this length is as large as the breadth, and as much
suiting the condition of the child of God, as the other is. For,
though sin sometimes is most afflicting to the conscience, while
the soul beholdeth the overspreading nature of it, yet here it
stoppeth not, but oft-times through the power and prevalency of
it, the soul is driven with it, as a ship by a mighty tempest, or
as a rolling thing before the whirlwind: driven, I say, from God,
and from all hopes of his mercy, as far as the east is from the
west, or as the ends of the world are asunder. Hence it is supposed
by the prophet, that for and by sin they may be driven from God
to the utmost part of heaven (Deu 30:4); and that is a sad thing,
a sad thing, I say, to a gracious man. "Why," saith the prophet
to God, "Art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of
my roaring?" (Psa 22:1). Sometimes a man, yea, a man of God, is,
as he apprehends, so far off from God, that he can neither help
him, nor hear him, and this is a dismal state. "And thou hast
removed my soul," said the church, "far off from peace: I forgat
prosperity" (Lam 3:17). This is the state sometimes of the
godly, and that not only with reference to their being removed by
persecutors, from the appointments and gospel-seasons, which are
their delight, and the desire of their eyes; but also with reverence
to their faith and hope in their God. They think themselves beyond
the reach of his mercy. Wherefore in answer to this conceit it is,
that the Lord asketh, saying, "Is my hand shortened at all that it
cannot redeem?" (Isa 50:2). And again, "Behold, the Lord's hand
is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that
it cannot hear" (Isa 59:1). Wherefore he saith again, "If any of
them be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven, from thence
will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch
thee" (Deu 30:4). God has a long arm, and he can reach a great
way further than we can conceive he can (Neh 1:9): When we think
his mercy is clean gone, and that ourselves are free among the
dead, and of the number that he remembereth no more, then he can
reach us, and cause that again we stand before him. He could reach
Jonah, tho' in the belly of hell (Jonah 2); and reach thee, even
then, when thou thinkest thy way is hid from the Lord, and thy
judgment passed over from thy God. There is length to admiration,
beyond apprehension or belief, in the arm of the strength of the
Lord; and this is that which the Apostle intended by this word,
Length; namely, To insinuate what a reach there is in the mercy
of God, how far it can extend itself. "If I take the wings of the
morning," said David, "and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;
even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold
me" (Psa 139:9,10). I will gather them from the east, and from
the west, and from the north, and from the south, saith he: That
is, from the utmost corners.

This therefore should encourage them that for the present cannot
stand, but that do fly before their guilt: Them that feel no help
nor stay, but that go, as to their thinking, every day by the power
of temptation, driven yet farther off from God, and from the hope
of obtaining of his mercy to their salvation; poor creature, I will
not now ask thee how thou camest into this condition, or how long
this has been thy state; but I will say before thee, and I prithee
hear me, O the length of the saving arm of God! As yet thou art
within the reach thereof; do not thou go about to measure arms
with God, as some good men are apt to do: I mean, do not thou
conclude, that because thou canst not reach God by thy short stump,
therefore he cannot reach thee with his long arm. Look again, "Hast
thou an arm like God" (Job 40:9), an arm like his for length and
strength? It becomes thee, when thou canst not perceive that God
is within the reach of thy arm, then to believe that thou art
within the reach of his; for it is long, and none knows how long.

Again, is there such a length? such a length in the arm of the
Lord, that he can reach those that are gone away, as far as they
could? then this should encourage us to pray, and hope for the
salvation of any one of our backslidden relations, that God would
reach out his arm after them: Saying, "Awake,--O arm of the Lord,--art
thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon? Art thou
not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep,
that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass
over?" (Isa 51:9,10). Awake, O arm of the Lord, and be stretched
out as far as to where my poor husband is, where my poor child,
or to where my poor backslidden wife or dear relation is, and lay
hold, fast hold; they are gone from thee, but, O thou the hope of
Israel, fetch them again, and let them stand before thee. I say,
here is in this word LENGTH matter of encouragement for us thus
to pray; for if the length of the reach of mercy is so great, and
if also this length is for the benefit of those that may be gone
off far from God, (for they at present have no need thereof that
are near) then improve this advantage at the throne of grace for
such, that they may come to God again. Thirdly, As there is a breadth
and length here, so there is a DEPTH. What is the breadth, and
length, and depth? And this depth is also put in here, on purpose
to help us under a trial that is diverse from the two former. I
told you, that by the breadth the Apostle insinuates a remedy and
succour to us, when we see our corruptions spread like a leprosy;
and by length he would shew us, that when sin has driven God's
elect to the farthest distance from him, yet his arm is long enough
to reach them, and fetch them back again.

But, I say, as we have here a breadth, and a length, so we have
also a depth. That ye may know what is the DEPTH. Christians have
sometimes their sinking fits, and are as if they were always
descending: or as Heman says, "counted with them that go down into
the pit" (Psa 88:4). Now guilt is not to such so much a wind and
a tempest, as a load and burden. The devil, and sin, and the curse
of the law, and death, are gotten upon the shoulders of this poor
man, and are treading of him down, that he may sink into, and be
swallowed up of his miry place.

"I sink," says David, "in deep mire, where there is no standing.
I am come into DEEP waters, where the floods overflow me" (Psa
69:2). Yea, there is nothing more common among the saints of old,
than this complaint: "Let neither the water flood overflow me,
neither let the deep swallow me up, neither let the pit shut her
mouth upon me" (Psa 69:14,15). Heman also saith, "Thou hast laid
me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps. Thy wrath lieth
hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy waves" (Psa
88:6,7). Hence it is again that the Psalmist says: "Deep calleth
unto deep, at the noise of thy water spouts: all thy waves, and
thy billows are gone over me" (Psa 42:7). Deep calleth unto deep:
What's that? Why, it is expressed in the verse before: "O God,"
says he, "My soul is cast down within me." "Down," that is, deep
into the jaws of distrust and fear. And, Lord, my soul in this
depth of sorrow calls for help to thy depth of mercy. For though
I am sinking and going down, yet not so low, but that thy mercy
is yet underneath me: Do of thy compassions open those everlasting
arms (Deu 33:27), and catch him that has no help or stay in himself:
For so it is with one that is falling into a well or a dungeon.

Now mark, as there is in these texts, the sinking condition of
the godly man set forth, of a man whom sin and Satan is treading
down into the deep; so in our text which I am speaking to at this
time, we have a depth that can more than counterpoise these deeps,
set forth with a hearty prayer, that we may know it. And although
the deeps, or depths of calamity into which the godly may fall,
may be as deep as Hell, and methinks they should be no deeper:
yet this is the comfort, and for the comfort of them of the godly
that are thus a sinking: The mercy of God for them lies deeper "It
is deeper than hell, what canst thou know?" (Job 11:8). And this
is that which made Paul that he was not afraid of this depth, "I
am persuaded," saith he, "that neither--height nor depth shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord" (Rom 8:38,39). But of this he could by no means
have been persuaded, had he not believed that mercy lieth deeper
for the godly to help them, than can all other depths be to destroy
them: This is it at which he stands and wonders, saying, "O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God" (Rom
11:33), that is to find out a way to save his people, notwithstanding
all the deep contrivances that the enemy hath, and may invent to
make us come short [of] home.

This is also that, as I take it, which is wrapped up in the blessing,
wherewith Jacob blessed his son Joseph. "God shall bless thee,"
saith he, "with blessings of heaven above," and with the "blessings
of the deep that lieth under" (Gen 49:25). A blessing which he had
ground to pronounce, as well from his observation of God's good
dealing with Joseph, as in a spirit of prophecy: For he saw that
he lived and was become a flourishing bough, by a wall, after that
the archers had done their worst to him (Gen 49:22-24). Moses also
blesseth God for blessing of Joseph thus, and blessed his portion
to him, as counting of it sufficient for his help in all afflictions.
"Blessed," saith he, "of the Lord, be his land, for the precious
things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth
beneath" (Deu 33:13).

I am not of belief that these blessings are confined to things
temporal, or carnal, but to things spiritual and divine; and that
they have most chiefly respect to soul, and eternal good. Now
mark, he tells us here, that the blessings of the deep, do couch
beneath. Couch, that is, lie close, so as hardly to be discerned by
him that willingly would see that himself is not below these arms
that are beneath him. But that as I said, is hard to be discerned
by him that thus is sinking, and that has as he now smartingly
feels, all God's waves, and his billows rolling over him. However,
whether he sees or not, for this blessing lieth couched; yet
there it is, and there will be, though one should sink as deep as
hell: And hence they are said to be "everlasting arms" that are
"underneath" (Deu 33:27): That is, arms that are long and strong,
and that can reach to the bottom, and also beyond, of all misery
and distress, that Christians are subject to in this life. Indeed
mercy seems to be asleep, when we are sinking: for then we are
as if all things were careless of us, but it is but as a lion
couchant, it will awake in time for our help (Psa 44:22,26, Mark
4:36-39). And forasmuch as this term is it, which is applicable
to the lion in his den; it may be to shew that as a lion, so will
God at the fittest season, arise for the help and deliverance of
a sinking people. Hence when he is said to address himself to the
delivering of his people, it is that he comes as a roaring lion.
"The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy
like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail
against his enemies" (Isa 42:13). However here is a depth against
the depth that's against us, let that depth be what it will. As
let it be the depth of misery, the depth of mercy is sufficient.
If it be the depth of hellish policy, the depth both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God shall go beyond it, and prevail.

This therefore is worthy of the consideration of all sinking souls;
of the souls that feel themselves descending into the pit. There
is such a thing as this experienced among the godly. Some come to
them (when tempted) when you will, they will tell you, they have
no ground to stand on, their feet have slipped, their foundation is
removed, and they fell themselves sinking, as into a pit that has
no bottom (Psa 11:3). They inwardly sink, not for want of something
to relieve the body, but for want of some spiritual cordial to
support the mind. "I went down to the bottoms of the mountains,"
said Jonah, "the earth with her bars was about me for ever;--my
soul fainted within me" (Jonah 2:6,7).

Now for such to consider that underneath them, even at the bottom
there lieth a blessing, or that in this deep whereinto they are
descending, there lieth a delivering mercy couching to catch them,
and to save them from sinking for ever, this would be relief unto
them, and help them to hope for good.

Again, As this, were it well considered by the sinking ones, would
yield them stay and relief, so this is it by the virtue whereof,
they that have been sinking heretofore, have been lifted up, and
above their castings down again. There are of those that have been
in the pit, now upon mount Sion, with the harps of God in their
hands, and with the song of the Lamb in their mouths. But how is
it that they are there? why, David, by his own deliverance shews
you the reason. "For great is thy mercy towards me," saith he,
"and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell" (Psa 86:13).
And again, "He brought me up also out of an horrible pit," (a pit
of noise, a pit wherein was the noise of devils, and of my heart
answering them with distrust and fear) "out of the miry clay,"
(into which I did not only sink, but was by it held from getting
up: but he brought me up) "and set my feet upon a rock, and
established my goings. And he hath put a new song in my mouth,
even praise to our God" (Psa 40:2,3).

But let me here give, if it may be, a timely caution to them that
think they stand upon their feet. Give not way to falling because
everlasting arms are underneath, take heed of that: God can let
thee fall into mischief, he can let thee fall, and not help thee
up. Tempt not God, lest he cast thee away indeed. I doubt there
are many that have presumed upon this mercy, that thus do couch
beneath, and have cast themselves down from their pinnacles into
vanity, of a vain conceit that they shall be lifted up again: whom
yet God will leave to die there, because their fall was rather
of willfulness, than weakness, and of stubbornness, and desperate
resolutions, than for want of means and helps to preserve them
from it.

Fourthly, As there is a breadth, and length, and depth, in this
mercy and grace of God through Christ towards his people: So there
is also a HEIGHT, "That ye may comprehend with all saints, what is
the breadth and length, and depth, and HEIGHT." There are things
that are high, as well as things that are low; things that are
above us, as well as things that are under, that are distressing
to God's people. It is said when Noah was a preacher of righteousness,
there were giants in the earth in those days (Gen 6:4). And these,
as I conceive, were some of the heights that were set against Noah;
yea, they were the very dads and fathers of all that monstrous
brood that followed in the world in that day. Of this sort were
they who so frighted, and terrified Israel, when they were to go
to inherit the land of promise. The men that were tall as cedars,
and strong as the oaks, frighted them: they were in their own
sight, when compared with these high ones, but as grasshoppers.
This therefore was their discouragement (Num 13:31-33, Deu 2:10,
9:2).

Besides, together with these, they had high walls, walls as high
as heaven; and these walls were of purpose to keep Israel out of
his possession. See how it is expressed: The people is greater
and taller than we, the cities are great and walled up to heaven:
and moreover, we have seen the sons of the Anakims there (Deu
1:28). One of these, to wit, Goliath by name, how did he fright
the children of Israel in the days of Saul! How did the appearance
of him, make them scuttle together on heaps before him (1 Sam 17).
By these giants, and by these high walls, God's children to this
day are sorely distressed, because they stand in the cross ways
to cut off Israel from his possession.

But now to support us against all these, and to encourage us to
take heart notwithstanding all these things; there is for us, a
height in God. He hath made his Son higher than the kings of the
earth (Psa 89:26-28): His word also is settled for ever in heaven,
and therefore must needs be higher than their walls (Psa 119:89):
He also saith in another place, "If thou seest the oppression
of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in
a province, marvel not at the matter; for he that is higher than
the highest, regardeth, and there be higher than they" (Eccl
5:8). 'Twas this that made Paul, that he feared not the height:
not things present, nor things to come (Rom 8:39).

But again, As there are these things standing, or lying in our
way: So there are another sort of heights that are more mischievous
than these: And they are the fallen angels. These are called spiritual
wickedness, or wicked spirits, in high places (Eph 6:12): For God
has suffered them for a time to take to themselves principality
and power, and so they are become the rulers of the darkness of
this world. By these we are tempted, sifted, threatened, opposed,
undermined: also by these there are snares, pits, holes, and what
not made and laid for us, if peradventure by something we may be
destroyed. Yea, and we should most certainly be so, were it not
for the rock that is higher than they. "But he that cometh from
heaven is above all!" (John 3:31) These are they that our king
has taken captive, and hath rid (in his chariots of salvation)
in triumph over their necks. These are they, together with all
others, whose most devilish designs he can wield, and turn and
make work together for his ransomed's advantage (Rom 8:28), There
is a height, an infinitely overtopping height in the mercy and
goodness of God for us, against them.

There are heights also that build up themselves in us, which are
not but to be taken notice of: Yea, there are a many of them, and
they place themselves directly so, that if possible they may keep
the saving knowledge of God out of our hearts. These high things
therefore are said to exalt themselves against the knowledge of God
(2 Cor 10:5): and do ofttimes more plague, afflict, and frighten
Christian men and women, than any thing besides. It is from these
that our faith and spiritual understanding of God and his Christ
is opposed and contradicted, and from these also that we are so
inclinable to swerve from right doctrine into destructive opinions.
'Tis from these that we are so easily persuaded to call into
question our former experience of the goodness of God towards us,
and from these that our minds are so often clouded and darkened
that we cannot see afar off. These would betray us into the hands
of fallen angels, and men, nor should we by any means help or
deliver ourselves, were it not for one that is higher. These are
the dark mountains at which our feet would certainly stumble, and
upon which we should fall, were it not for one who can leap and
skip over these mountains of division, and come in to us (Song
2:8,17).

Further, There is a height also that is obvious to our senses, the
which when it is dealt withal by our corrupted reason, proves a
great shaking to our mind, and that is the height, and exceeding
distance that heaven is off of us, and we off it. "Is not God in
the height of heaven? and behold the height of the stars, how high
they are?" (Job 22:12) Hence heaven is called the place for height
(Prov 25:3), Also when Ahaz is bid to ask with reference to heaven,
he is bid to ask it, In the height, the height above (Isa 7:11).
Now saith reason, how shall I come thither? especially when a good
man is at his furthest distance therefore: which is, when he is
in the grave. Now I say, every height is a difficulty to him that
is loaden with a burden, especially the heaven of heavens, where
God is, and where is the resting-place of his, to them that are
oppressed with the guilt of sin. And besides, the dispensation which
happeneth to us last, to wit, death, as I said before, makes this
heaven, in my thoughts while I live so much the more unaccessible.
Christ indeed could mount up (Acts 1:9), but me, poor me, how
shall I get thither? Elias indeed had a chariot sent him to ride
in thither, and went up by it into that holy place (2 Kings 2:11):
but I, poor I, how shall I get thither? Enoch is there, because
God took him (Gen 5:24), but as for me, how shall I get thither?
Thus some have mourningly said. And although distrust of the power
of God, as to the accomplishing of this thing, is by no means to
be smiled upon, yet methinks the unconcernedness of professors
thereabout, doth argue that considering thoughts about that, are
wanting.

I know the answer is ready. Get Christ and go to heaven. But
methinks the height of the place, and the glory of the state that
we are to enjoy therein, should a little concern us, at least
so as to make us wonder in our thinking, that the time is coming
that we must mount up thither. And since there are so many heights
between this place, between us, and that; it should make us admire
at the heights of the grace and mercy of God, by which, means is
provided to bring us thither. And I believe that this thing, this
very thing, is included here by the Apostle when he prays for the
Ephesians, that they might know the height.

Methinks, How shall we get thither will still stick in my mind.
"I will ascend," says one, "above the height of the clouds, I will
be like the most High" (Isa 14:14). And I, says another, will set
my nest among the stars of heaven (Oba 4). Well, but what of all
this? If heaven has gates, and they shall be shut, how wilt thou
go in thither? Though such should climb up to heaven, from thence
will God bring them down (Amos 9:2), Still I say, therefore, how
shall we get in thither? Why, for them that are godly, there is
the power of God, the merits of Christ, the help of angels, and
the testimony of a good conscience to bring them thither; and he
that has not the help of all these, let him do what he can, shall
never come thither. Not that all these go to the making up of the
height that is intended in the text: for the height there, is
what is in God through Christ to us alone. But the angels are the
servants of God for that end (Luke 16:22, Heb 1:14): and none with
ill consciences enter in thither (Psa 15:1, 24:3,4), What, "know
ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?
be not deceived" (1 Cor 6:9), such have none inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and of God (Eph 5:5).

This then should teach us that in God is a power that is able to
subdue all things to himself. In the completing of many things,
there seems to be an utter impossibility, as that a virgin should
conceive in her womb, as a virgin, and bring a Son into the world;
that the body that is turned into dust, should arise and ascend
into the highest heaven (Phil 3:21). These things with many more
seem to be utterly impossible: but there is that which is called
the power of God, by the which he is able to make all things
bend to his will, and to make all obstructions give place to what
he pleases. God is high above all things and can do whatever it
pleaseth him. But since he can do so, why doth he suffer this,
and that thing to appear, to act, and do so horribly repugnant to
his word? I answer, he admits of many things, to the end he may
shew his wrath, and make his power known; and that all the world
may see how he checks and overrules the most vile and unruly
things, and can make them subservient to his holy will. And how
would the breadth and the length, and the depth, and the height
of the love and mercy of God in Christ to us-ward, be made to
appear, so as in all things it doth, were there not admitted that
there should be breadths, and lengths, and depths and heights, to
oppose. Wherefore these oppositions are therefore suffered, that
the greatness of the wisdom, the power, the mercy, and grace of
God to us in Christ might appear and be made manifest unto us.

This calls therefore upon Christians, wisely to consider of the
doings of their God. How many opposite breadths, and lengths, and
depths, and heights did Israel meet with in their journey from
Egypt to Canaan, and all to convince them of their own weakness,
and also of the power of their God. And they that did wisely consider
of his doings there, did reap the advantage thereof. Come, behold
the works of the Lord towards me, may every Christian say. He hath
set a Saviour against sin; a heaven against a hell; light against
darkness; good against evil, and the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height of the grace that is in himself, for my good,
against all the power, and strength, and force, and subtilty, of
every enemy.

This also, as I hinted but just before, shews both the power of
them that hate us, and the inability of us to resist. The power
that is set against us none can crush, and break, but God: for it
is the power of devils, of sin, of death, and hell. But we for our
parts are crushed before the moth: being a shadow, a vapour, and
a wind that passes away (Job 4:19). Oh! how should we, and how would
we, were but our eyes awake, stand and wonder at the preservations,
the deliverances, the salvations and benefits with which we are
surrounded daily: while so many mighty evils seek daily to swallow
us up, as the grave. See how the golden psalm of David reads
it. "Be merciful unto me, O God; for man would swallow me up; he
fighting daily oppresseth me. Mine enemies would daily swallow
me up: for they be many that fight against me, O thou most high"
(Psa 56:1,2). This is at the beginning of it. And he concludes
it thus, "Thou hast delivered my soul from death: will not thou
deliver my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the
light of the living" (verse 13).

By this also we see the reason why it is so impossible for man or
angel to persuade unbelievers to come in to, and close with Christ;
why there is a breadth that they cannot get over, a length that
they cannot get beyond, a depth that they cannot pass, and heights
that so hinder them of the prospect of glory, and the way thereto,
that they cannot be allured thither. And that nothing can remove
these; but those that are in God, and that are opposite thereto;
even the breadth, and length, and depth and height that is in
the text expressed, is to all awakened men an undoubted truth. 2

One item I would here give to him that loveth his own soul, and
then we will pass on in pursuance of what is to come. Since there
is an height obvious to sense, and that that height must be overcome
ere a man can enter into life eternal: let thy heart be careful
that thou go the right way to overpass this height, that thou
mayest not miss of the delectable plains, and the pleasures that are
above. Now, there is nothing so high, as to overtop this height;
but Jacob's ladder, and that can do it: that ladder, when the foot
thereof doth stand upon the earth, reacheth with its top to the
gate of heaven. This is the ladder by which angels ascend thither:
and this is the ladder by which thou mayest ascend thither. "And
he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top
of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending
and descending on it" (Gen 28:12).

This ladder is Jesus Christ, the son of man, as is clear by the
evangelist John (John 1:51). And in that it is said to stand upon
the earth, that is to shew that he took hold of man who is of the
earth, and therein laid a foundation for his salvation: in that
it is said the top reached up to heaven, that is to shew that the
divine nature was joined to the human, and by that means he was
every way made a Saviour complete. Now concerning this ladder,
'tis said, Heaven was open where it stood, to shew that by him
there is entrance into life: 'tis said also concerning this ladder,
that the Lord stood there, at the top, above it: saying, "I am the
Lord God of Abraham" (Gen 28:13), to shew his hearty and willing
reception of those that ascend the height of his sanctuary this
way. All which Christ further explains by saying, "I am the way,
and the truth, and the life, no man cometh unto the father, but
by me" (John 14:6). Look to thyself then, that thou do truly and
after the right manner embrace this ladder, so will he draw thee
up thither after him (John 12:32). All the rounds of this ladder
are sound and fitly placed, not one of them is set further than
that by faith thou mayest ascend step by step unto, even until
thou shalt come to the highest step thereof, from whence, or by
which thou mayest step in at the celestial gate where thy soul
desireth to dwell.

Take my caution then, and be wary, no man can come thither but by
him. Thither I say to be accepted: thither, there to dwell, and
there to abide with joy for ever.

"That ye--may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love
of Christ which passeth knowledge."

Having thus spoke of the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, that is in God's mercy by Christ to us-ward; we will now
come more directly to

THE PRAYER OF THE APOSTLE FOR THESE EPHESIANS, WITH REFERENCE
THEREUNTO; to wit, that they might be able to comprehend with all
saints what they are. And

FIRST, As to THE ABILITY that he prays for, to the end that they
may be capable to do this thing.

First, That ye may be able. The weakness that is here supposed to
hinder their thus comprehending, &c., did doubtless lie in their
grace, as well as their nature: for in both, with reference to
them that are Christians, there is great disability, unless they be
strengthened mightily by the Holy Ghost. Nature's ability depends
upon graces, and the ability of graces, depends upon the mighty
help of the spirit of God. Hence as nature itself, where grace
is not, sees nothing; so nature by grace sees but weakly, if that
grace is not strengthened with all might by the spirit of grace.
The breadths, lengths, depths and heights here made mention of,
are mysteries, and in all their operations, do work wonderfully
mysteriously: insomuch that many times, though they are all of
them busily engaged for this and the other child of God, yet they
themselves see nothing of them. As Christ said to Peter, "What I
do thou knowest not now" (John 13:7); so may it be said to many
where the grace and mercy of God in Christ is working: they do not
know, they understand not what it is, nor what will be the end of
such dispensations of God towards them. Wherefore they also say as
Peter to Christ, "Dost thou wash my feet?--thou shalt never wash
my feet" (John 13:6-8); Yea, and when some light to convince of
this folly breaks in upon them, yet if it be not very distinct and
clear; causing the person to know the true cause, nature, and end
of God's doing of this or that, they swerve with Peter, as much
on the other side (John 13:9,10). They have not known my ways, and
my methods with them in this world, were that that caused Israel
always to err in their hearts (Heb 3:10), and lie cross to all,
and each of these breadths, lengths, depths, and heights, whenever
they were under the exercise of any of them in the wilderness.

And the reason is, as I said before, for that they are very
mysterious in their workings. For they work by, upon, and against
oppositions; for, and in order to the help and salvation of his
people. Also (as was hinted a while since) that the power and
glory of this breadth, and length, &c. of the mercy and grace of
God, may the more shew its excellency and sufficiency as to our
deliverance; we by him seem quite to be delivered up to the breadths,
lengths, and depths, and heights that oppose, and that utterly seek
our ruin: wherefore at such times, nothing of breadths, lengths,
depths, or heights can be seen, save by those that are very well
skilled in those mysterious methods of God, in his gracious actings
towards his people. "Who will bring me into the strong city,"
and "wilt not thou, O God, which hadst cast us off? and thou, O
God, which didst not go out with our armies?" (Psa 60:9,10) is a
lesson too hard for every Christian man to say over believingly.
And what was it that made Jonah say, when he was in the belly of
hell, "Yet I will look again toward thy holy temple" (Jonah 2:4),
but the good skill that he had in understanding of the mystery of
these breadths, and lengths, and depths, and heights of God, and
of the way of his working by them. Read the text at large. "Thou
hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas, and the
floods compassed me about. All thy billows and thy waves passed
over me. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look
again toward thy holy temple" (Jonah 2:3,4).

These, and such like sentences, are easily played with by a
preacher, when in the pulpit, specially if he has a little of the
notion of things, but of the difficulty and strait, that those
are brought into, out of whose mouth such things, or words are
extorted, by reason of the force of the labyrinths they are fallen
into: of those they experience nothing, wherefore to those they
are utterly strangers.

He then that is able to comprehend with all saints what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; must be a good expositor
of providences, and must see the way, and the workings of God by
them. Now there are providences of two sorts, seemingly good, and
seemingly bad, and those do usually as Jacob did, when he blessed
the sons of Joseph, cross hands; and lay the blessing where we
would not. "And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right
hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him" (Gen 48:17). I
say there are providences unto which we would have the blessings
entailed, but they are not. And they are providences that smile
upon the flesh; to wit, such as cast into the lap, health, wealth,
plenty, ease, friends, and abundance of this world's good: because
these, [Manasseh, as his name doth signify,] have in them an aptness
to make us forget our toil, our low estate, and from whence we
were (Gen 41:51): but the great blessing is not in them. There are
providences again, that take away from us whatever is desirable
to the flesh; such is the sickness, losses, crosses, persecution
and affliction; and usually in these though they make us shuck 3
whenever they come upon us, blessing coucheth, and is ready to help
us. For God, as the name of Ephraim signifies, makes us "fruitful
in the land of our affliction" (Gen 41:52). He therefore, in blessing
of his people, lays his hands across, guiding them wittingly, and
laying the chiefest blessing on the head of Ephraim, or in that
providence, that sanctifies affliction. Abel! what, to the reason
of Eve was he, in comparison of Cain. Rachel called Benjamin the
son of her sorrow: but Jacob knew how to give him a better name
(Gen 35:18). Jabez also, though his mother so called him, because,
as it seems, she brought him forth with more than ordinary sorrow,
was yet more honourable, more godly, than his brethren (1 Chron
4:9,10). He that has skill to judge of providences aright, has a
great ability in him to comprehend with other saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height: but he that has not
skill as to discerning of them, is but a child in his judgment
in those high and mysterious things. And hence it is, that some
shall suck honey out of that, at the which others tremble for fear
it should poison them, I have often been made to say, "Sorrow is
better than laughter; and the house of mourning better than the
house of mirth" (Eccl 7:3-5). And I have more often seen, that
the afflicted are always the best sort of Christians. There is a
man, never well, never prospering, never but under afflictions,
disappointments and sorrows: why this man, if he be a Christian,
is one of the best of men. "They that go down to the sea,--that
do business in great waters, these see the works of the Lord, and
his wonders in the deep." 4 (Psa 107:23,24) And it is from hence,
for aught I know, that James admonishes the brother of high degree
to rejoice in that he is made low. And he renders the reason of
it, to wit, for that the fashion of the world perisheth, the rich
man fadeth away in his way; but the tempted, and he that endureth
temptation is blessed (James 1:10-12). Now, I know these things
are not excellent in themselves, nor yet to be desired for any
profit that they can yield, but God doth use by these, as by a
tutor or instructor, to make known to them that are exercised with
them, so much of himself as to make them understand that riches of
his goodness that is seldom by other means broken up to the sons
of men. And hence 'tis said, that the afterwards of affliction
doth yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness unto them which
are exercised thereby (Heb 12:11).

The sum is, these breadths, and lengths, and depths, and heights
of God, are to be discerned; and some that are good, do more, and
some do less discern them, and how they are working, and putting
forth themselves in every providence, in every change, in every turn
of the wheel that passeth by us in this world. I do not question
but that there are some that are alive that have been able
to say, the days of affliction have been the best unto them; and
that could, if it were lawful, pray that they might always be in
affliction, if God would but do to them as he did when his hand
was last upon them. For by them he caused his light to shine: Or
as Job has it, "Thou huntest me as a fierce lion: and again thou
shewest thyself marvelously upon me" (Job 10:16). See also the
writing of Hezekiah, and read what profit he found in afflictions
(Isa 38).

But again, these breadths, lengths, depths, and heights, have in
themselves naturally that glory, that cannot be so well discerned,
or kept in view by weak eyes. He had need have an eye like an
eagle, that can look upon the sun, that can look upon these great
things, and not be stricken blind therewith. You see how Saul was
served when he was going to Damascus (Acts 9): But Stephen could
stand and look up steadfastly into heaven; and that too when with
Jonah he was going into the deep (Acts 7). But I have done with
this, and proceed.

Second--That ye may be able to comprehend. Although apprehending
is included in comprehending; yet to comprehend is more. To
comprehend is to know a thing fully; or, to reach it all. But here
we must distinguish, and say, that there is a comprehending that
is absolute, and a comprehending that is comparative. Of comprehending
absolutely, or perfectly, we are not here to speak; for that the
Apostle could not, in this place, as to the thing prayed for,
desire: For it is utterly impossible perfectly to know whatsoever
is in the breadths, lengths, depths, and heights here spoken
of. Whether you call them mercies, judgments, or the ways of God
with men. "How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out!" (Rom 11:33) Or, if you take them to signify his
love, unto which you see I am inclined; why, that you read of in
the same place, to be it "which passes knowledge." Wherefore should
the Apostle by this term, conclude, or insinuate, that what he
calls here breadths, lengths, depths, or heights, might be fully,
or perfectly understood and known, he would not only contradict
other scriptures, but himself, in one and the self same breath.
Wherefore it must be understood comparatively; that is, and that
he says, with, or as much as others, as any, even with all saints.
That ye may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height. I would ye were as
able to understand, to know, and to find out these things, as ever
any were; and to know with the very best of saints, The love of
Christ, which passeth knowledge. There are, as has before been
hinted, degrees of knowledge of these things; some know more,
some less; but the Apostle prays that these Ephesians might see,
know, and understand as much thereof as the best, or as any under
heaven.

1. And this, in the first place, shews us the love of a minister of
Jesus Christ. A minister's love to his flock is seen in his praying
for them: wherefore Paul, commonly, by his epistles, either first
or last, or both, gives the churches to understand, That he did
often heartily pray to God for them (Rom 16:20,24, 1 Cor 16:23,
Gal 6:18, Eph 1:16, Phil 1:4, Col 1:3, 1 Thess 1:2, 1 Tim 6:21,
2 Tim 4:22): And not only so, but also specifies the mercies, and
blessings, and benefits which he earnestly begged for them of God
(2 Cor 13:7, 2 Thess 1:11).

2. But, secondly, This implies that there are great benefits
accrued to Christians by the comprehending of these things: Yea,
it implies that something very special is ministered to us by this
knowledge of these; and here to touch upon a few of them.

(1.) He that shall arrive to some competent knowledge of these
things, shall understand more thoroughly the greatness, the wisdom,
the power, &c. of the God that is above. For by these expressions
are the attributes of God set forth unto us: And although I have
discoursed of them hitherto under the notion of grace and mercy,
yet it was not for that I concluded, they excluded the expressing
of his other attributes, but because they all, as it were, turn
into loving methods in the wheel of their heavenly motion towards
the children of God. Hence it is said, "God is love" (1 John 4:16),
"God is light" (1 John 1:5), God is what He is for His own glory,
and the good of them that fear Him. God! Why God in the breadth,
length, depth, height, that is here intended, comprehends the whole
world (Col 1:17). The whole world is in him: for he is before,
above, beyond, and round about all things. Hence it is said,
The heavens for breadth, are but his span: That he gathereth the
wind in his fists (Prov 30:4): measureth the waters in the hollow
of his hand, weigheth the mountains in scales, and the hills in
a balance (Isa 40:12). Yea, that "all nations before him are as
nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity"
(verse 17). Hence we are said to live and move in him (Acts 17:28),
and that He is beyond all search.

I will add one word more, notwithstanding there is such a revelation
of Him in his word, in the book of creatures, and in the book of
providences; yet the scripture says, "Lo, these are parts of his
ways: but how little a portion is heard of him?" (Job 26:14) So
great is God above all that we have read, heard, or seen of Him,
either in the bible, in heaven, or earth, the sea, or what else
is to be understood. But now, That a poor mortal, a lump of sinful
flesh, or, as the scripture-phrase is, poor dust and ashes, should
be in the favour, in the heart, and wrapped up in the compassions
of SUCH a God! O amazing! O astonishing consideration! And yet
"This God is our God for ever and ever; and He will be our guide
even unto death" (Psa 48:14).

It is said of our God, "That he humbleth himself when he beholds
things in heaven." How much more then when he openeth his eyes
upon man; but most of all when he makes it, as one may say, his
business to visit him every morning, and to try him every moment,
having set His heart upon him, being determined to set him also
among his princes. "The Lord is high above all nations, and his
glory above the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who
dwelleth on high, Who humbleth himself to behold the things that
are in heaven, and in the earth! He raiseth up the poor out of
the dust, and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill; that he may
set him with princes, even with the princes of his people" (Psa
113:3-8).

(2.) IF this God be our God; or if our God be such a God, and could
we but attain to that knowledge of the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height that is in him, as the Apostle here prays, and
desires we may, we should never be afraid of anything we shall
meet with, or that shall assault us in this world. The great God,
the former of all things, taketh part with them that fear Him, and
that engage themselves to walk in His ways, of love, and respect,
they bear unto him; so that such may boldly say, "The Lord is my
helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me" (Heb 13:6).
Would it not be amazing, should you see a man encompassed with
chariots and horses, and weapons for his defence, yet afraid of
being sparrow blasted, or over-run by a grasshopper! Why "It is
he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and" to whom "the
inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers" (Isa 40:22): that is the
God of the people that are lovers of Jesus Christ; therefore we
should not fear them. To fear man, is to forget God; and to be
careless in a time of danger, is to forget God's ordinance. What
is it then? Why, let us fear God, and diligently keep his way,
with what prudence and regard to our preservation, and also the
preservation of what we have, we may: And if, we doing this, our
God shall deliver us, and what we have, into the hands of them
that hate us, let us laugh, be fearless and careless, not minding
now to do anything else but to stand up for Him against the workers
of iniquity; fully concluding, that both we, and our enemies, are
in the hand of him that loveth his people, and that will certainly
render a reward to the wicked, after that he has sufficiently
tried us by their means. "The great God that formed all things,
both rewardeth the fool, and rewardeth transgressors" (Prov 26:10).5

(3.) Another thing that the knowledge of what is prayed for of the
Apostle, if we attain it, will minister to us, is, An holy fear
and reverence of this great God in our souls; both because he is
great, and because he is wise and good (Jer 10:7). "Who shall not
fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?" (Rev 15:4)

Greatness should beget fear, greatness should beget reverence:
Now who so great as our God; and so, who to be feared like him!
He also is wise, and will not be deceived by any. "He will bring
evil, and not call back his words, but will rise against the house
of evil-doers, and against the help of them that work iniquity"
(Isa 31:2). Most men deal with God as if he were not wise; as if
he either knew not the wickedness of their hearts and ways, or
else knew not how to be even with them for it: When, alas! he is
wise in heart, and mighty in power; and although he will not, without
cause, afflict, yet he will not let wickedness go unpunished. This
therefore should make us fear. He also is good, and this should
make us serve him with fear. Oh! that a great God should be a
good God; a good God to an unworthy, to an undeserving, and to a
people that continually do what they can to provoke the eyes of
his glory; this should make us tremble. He is fearful in service,
fearful in praises.

The breadth, and length, and depth, and height of his out-going
towards the children of men, should also beget in us a very great
fear and dread of his majesty. When the prophet saw the height of
the wheels, he said they were dreadful (Eze 1:18), and cried out
unto them, O wheel! (10:13). His judgments also are a great deep
(Psa 36:6); nor is there any "searching of his understanding" (Isa
40:28). He can tell how to bring his wheel upon us; and to make
our table a snare, a trap, and a stumbling-block unto us (Isa
8:14, Rom 11:8-10). He can tell how to make his Son to us a rock
of offence, and his gospel to be a savour of death unto death,
unto us (2 Cor 2:15,16). He can tell how to choose delusions for
us (Isa 66:4, 2 Thess 2:11,12), and to lead us forth with the
workers of iniquity (Psa 125:5), He can out-wit, and out-do us, and
prevail against us for ever (Job 14:20); and therefore we should
be afraid and fear before Him, for our good, and the good of ours
for ever: Yea, it is for these purposes, with others, that the
Apostle prayeth thus for this people: For the comprehending of
these things, do poise and keep the heart in an even course. This
yields comfort; this gives encouragement; this begets fear and
reverence in our hearts of God.

(4.) This knowledge will make us willing that he should be our
God; yea, will also make us abide by that willingness. Jacob said
with a vow, "If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way
that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,
so that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall
the Lord be my God: And this stone, which I have set for a pillar,
shall be God's house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will
surely give the tenth unto thee" (Gen 28:20-22). Thus he considered
the greatness of God, and from a supposition that he was what he
had heard him, of his father, to be; he concluded to choose him for
his God, and that he would worship him, and give him that honour
that was due to him as God. How did the king of Babylon set him
above all gods, when but some sparkling rays from him did light upon
him: he calls him "a God of gods" (Dan 2:47), prefers him above
all gods, charges all people and nations that they do nothing amiss
against him (Dan 3:28,29): he calls him "the most high" God, the
God "that liveth for ever"; and confesses, that he doth whatsoever
he will in heaven and earth; and concludes with praising and
extolling of him (Dan 4). We naturally love greatness; and when
the glorious beauty of the King of glory shall be manifest to us,
and we shall behold it, we shall say as Joshua did; Let all men
do as seems them good; but I, and my house will serve the Lord
(Josh 24:15).

When the Apostle Paul sought to win the Athenians to him, he sets
Him forth before them with such terms as bespeaks his greatness;
calling of him (and that rightly) "God that made the world, and
all things:--the Lord of heaven and earth;--One that giveth to all
life and breath, and all things"; One that is nigh to every one;
"he in whom we live, and move, and have our being": God that hath
made of one blood all nations of men, and that hath determined
the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation,
&c. (Acts 17:24-28) These things bespeak the greatness of God, and
are taking to considering men. Yea, these very Athenians, while
ignorant of him, from those dark hints that they had by natural
light concerning him, erected an altar to him, and put this
singular inscription upon it, "To the unknown God": to shew, that
according to their mode, they had some kind of reverence for him:
but how much more when they came to know him? and to believe that
God, in all his greatness, had engaged himself to be theirs; and
to bring them to himself, that they might in time be partakers of
his glory.

(5.) The more a man knows, or understands of the greatness of God
towards him, expressed here by the terms of unsearchable breadth,
length, depth, and height; the better will he be able in his heart
to conceive of the excellent glory and greatness of the things
that are laid up in the heavens for them that fear him. They that
know nothing of this greatness, know nothing of them; they that
think amiss of this greatness, think amiss of them; they that
know but little of this greatness, know but little of them: But
he that is able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height; he is best able to conceive
of, and, consequently to make a judgment concerning the due worth,
and blessed glory of them.

This is both evident to reason; also experience confirmeth the same.
For, as for those dark souls that know nothing of his greatness,
they have in derision those who are, through the splendor of the
glory, captivated and carried away after God. Also, those whose
judgments are corrupted, and themselves thereby made as drunkards,
to judge of things foolishly, they, as it were, step in the same
steps with the other, and vainly imagine thereabout. Moreover,
we shall see those little spirited Christians, though Christians
indeed, that are but in a small measure acquainted with this God,
with the breadths, and lengths, and depths, and heights that are
in him, taken but little with the glory and blessedness that they
are to go to when they die: wherefore they are neither so mortified
to this world, so dead to sin, so self-denying, so delighted in
the book of God, nor so earnest in desires to be acquainted with
the heights, and depths that are therein. No, this is reserved
only for those who are devoted thereto: who have been acquainted
with God in a measure beyond that which your narrow-spirited Christians
understand. There doth want as to these things, enlargings in the
hearts of the most of saints, as there did in those of Corinth,
and also in those at Ephesus: Wherefore, as Paul bids the one, and
prays that the other may be enlarged, and have great knowledge
thereabout: so we should, to answer such love, through desire,
separate ourselves from terrene things that we may seek and
intermeddle with all wisdom (Prov 18:1). Christ says, "If any man
will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine" (John 7:17, Isa
28:9). Oh! that we were indeed enlarged as to these breadths, and
lengths, and depths, and heights of God, as the Apostle desired
the Ephesians might.

(6.) Then those great truths; the coming of Christ, the resurrection
of the dead, and eternal judgment, would neither seem so like
fables, nor be so much off our hearts as they do, and are (1 Cor
15:35). For the thorough belief of them depends upon the knowledge
of the abilities that are in God to perform what he has said
thereabout: And hence it is that your inferiour sort of Christians
live so like, as if none of these things were at hand; and hence
it is again, that they so soon are shaken in mind about them,
when tempted of the devil, or briskly assaulted by deceivers. But
this cometh to pass that there may be fulfilled what is written:
"And while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept"
(Matt 25:1-7). Surely, the meaning is, they were asleep about his
coming, the resurrection and the judgment; and, consequently had
lost much of that knowledge of God, the which if they had retained;
these truths, with power, would have been upon their hearts. The
Corinthians were horribly decayed here, though some more than
others: Hence Paul, when he treats of this doctrine, bids them
"awake to righteousness," and not sin, telling them, that some
among them had not the knowledge of God (1 Cor 15:34). To be sure,
they had not such a knowledge of God as would keep them steady in
the faith of these things (verse 51).

Now, the knowledge of the things above-mentioned, to wit, "this
comprehending knowledge"; will greaten these things, bring them
near, and make them to be credited as are the greatest of God's
truth: and the virtue of the faith of them is, to make one die
daily. Therefore,

(7.) Another advantage that floweth from this knowledge, is, that
it makes the next world desirable, not simply as it is with those
lean souls, that desire it only as the thief desireth the judge's
favour, that he may be saved from the halter; but out of love such
have to God and to the beauties of the house he dwells in; and
that they may be rid of this world, which is to such as a dark
dungeon. The knowledge of God that men pretend they have, may
easily be judged of, by the answerable or unanswerableness of their
hearts and lives thereto. Where is the man that groans earnestly
to be gone to God, that counts this life a strait unto him: that
saith as a sick man of my acquaintance did, when his friend at his
bed-side prayed to God to spare his life, No, no, said he, pray
not so; for it is better to be dissolved and be gone. Christians
should shew the world how they believe; not by words on paper, not
by gay and flourishing notions (James 2:18): but by those desires
they have to be gone, and the proof that these desires are true,
is a life in heaven while we are on earth (Phil 3:20,21). I know
words are cheap, but a dram of grace is worth all the world. But
where, as I said, shall it be found, not among carnal men, not
among weak Christians, but among those, and those only, that enjoy
a great measure of Paul's wish here. But to come to the

SECOND PART OF THE TEXT.

AND TO KNOW THE LOVE OF CHRIST WHICH PASSETH KNOWLEDGE. These
words are the second part of the text, and they deal mainly about
the love of Christ, who is the Son of God. We have spoken already
briefly of God, and therefore now we shall speak also of his Son.
These words are a part of the prayer afore-mentioned, and have
something of the same strain in them. In the first part, he prays
that they might comprehend that which cannot absolutely by any
means be comprehended: and here he prays that that might be known,
which yet in the same breath he saith, passeth knowledge, to wit,
the love of Christ. And to know the love of Christ, which passeth
knowledge. In the words we are to take notice of three things:

FIRST, Of the love of Christ.

SECOND, Of the exceeding greatness of it.

THIRD, Of the knowledge of it.

FIRST, We will begin with the first of these, to wit, Of the love
of Christ. Now for the explication of this we must inquire into
three things, First, Who Christ is. Second, What love is. Third,
What the love of Christ is.

First, Christ is a person of no less quality than he is of whom
we treated before: to wit, very God. So I say, not titularly, not
nominally, not so counterfeitly, but the self-same in nature with
the Father (John 1:1,2, 1 John 5:7, Phil 2:6). Wherefore what we
have under consideration, is so much the more to be taken notice
of; namely, that a person so great, so high, so glorious, as this
Jesus Christ was, should have love for us, that passes knowledge.
It is common for equals to love, and for superiors to be beloved;
but for the King of princes, for the Son of God, for Jesus Christ
to love man thus: this is amazing, and that so much the more, for
that man the object of this love, is so low, so mean, so vile, so
undeserving, and so inconsiderable, as by the scriptures, everywhere
he is described to be.

But to speak a little more particularly of this person. He is called
God (John 1:1). The King of glory (Psa 24:10), and Lord of glory
(1 Cor 2:8). The brightness of the glory of his Father (Heb 1:3).
The head over all things (Eph 1:22). The Prince of life (Acts
3:15). The Creator of all things (Col 1:16). The upholder of all
things (Heb 1:3). The disposer of all things (Matt 28:18). The
only beloved of the Father (Matt 11).

But the persons of him beloved, are called transgressors, sinners,
enemies, dust and ashes, fleas (1 Sam 24:14), worms, shadows,
vapours: vile, sinful, filthy, unclean, ungodly fools, madmen.
And now is it not to be wondered at, and are we not to be affected
herewith, saying, And wilt thou set thine eye upon such an one?
But how much more when He will set his heart upon us. And yet
this great, this high, this glorious person, verily, verily loveth
such.

Second, We now come to the second thing, namely, to shew what is
love; not in a way of nice distinction of words, but in a plain
and familiar discourse, yet respecting the love of the person
under consideration.

Love ought to be considered with reference to the subject as well
as to the object of it.

The subject of love in the text, is Christ; but forasmuch as love
in him is diverse from the love that is in us; therefore it will
not be amiss, if a little [of] the difference be made appear.

Love in us is a passion of the soul, and being such, is subject
to ebb and flow, and to be extreme both ways. For whatever is a
passion of the soul, whether love or hatred, joy or fear, is more
apt to exceed, or come short, than to keep within its due bounds.
Hence, oft-times that which is loved today is hated tomorrow
(2 Sam 13:15); yea, and that which should be loved with bounds
of moderation, is loved to the drowning of both soul and body in
perdition and destruction (1 Tim 6:9,10).

Besides, love in us is apt to choose to itself undue and unlawful
objects, and to reject those, that with leave of God, we may
embrace and enjoy; so unruly, as to the laws and rules of divine
government, oft-times is this passion of love in us.

Love in us, requires, that something pleasing and delightful be
in the object loved, at least, so it must appear to the lust and
fancy of the person loving, or else love cannot act; for the love
that is in us, is not of power to set itself on work, where no
allurement is in the thing to be beloved.

Love in us decays, though once never so warm and strongly fixed,
if the object falls off, as to its first alluring provocation; or
disappointeth our expectation with some unexpected reluctancy to
our fancy or our mind.

All this we know to be true from nature, for every one of us are
thus; nor can we refuse, or choose as to love, but upon, and after
the rate, and the working thus of our passions. Wherefore our
love, as we are natural, is weak, unorderly, fails and miscarries,
either by being too much or too little; yea, though the thing which
is beloved be allowed for an object of love, both by the law of
nature and grace. We therefore must put a vast difference betwixt
love, as found in us, and love as found in Christ, and that, both
as to the nature, principle, or object of love.

Love in Christ is not love of the same nature, as is love in us;
love in him is essential to his being (1 John 4:16); but in us
it is not so, as has been already shewed. God is love; Christ is
God; therefore Christ is love, love naturally. Love therefore is
essential to His being. He may as well cease to be, as cease to
love. Hence therefore it follows, that love in Christ floweth not
from so low and beggarly a principle, as doth love in man; and
consequently is not, nor can be attended with those infirmities
or defects, that the love of man is attended with.

It is not attended with those unruly or uncertain motions that ours
is attended with: here is no ebbing, no flowing, no going beyond,
no coming short; and so nothing of uncertainty. "Having loved his
own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end" (John
13:1).

True, there is a way of manifesting of this love, which is suited
to our capacities, as men, and by that we see it sometimes more,
sometimes less (Song 7:11,12): also it is manifested to us as we
do, or do not walk with God in this world (John 14:23). I speak
now of saints.

Love in Christ pitcheth not itself upon undue or unlawful objects;
nor refuseth to embrace what by the eternal covenant is made
capable thereof. It always acteth according to God; nor is there
at any time the least shadow of swerving as to this.

Love in Christ requireth no taking beauteousness in the object
to be beloved, as not being able to put forth itself without such
attracting allurements (Eze 16:6-8). It can act of and from itself,
without all such kind of dependencies. This is manifest to all who
have the least true knowledge of what that object is in itself,
on which the Lord Jesus has set his heart to love them.

Love in Christ decays not, nor can be tempted so to do by anything
that happens, or that shall happen hereafter, in the object so
beloved. But as this love at first acts by, and from itself, so
it continueth to do until all things that are imperfections, are
completely and everlastingly subdued. The reason is, because Christ
loves to make us comely, not because we are so (Eze 16:9-14).

Object. But all along Christ compareth his love to ours; now, why
doth he so, if they be so much alike?

Answer. Because we know not love but by the passions of love that
work in our hearts; wherefore he condescends to our capacities,
and speaketh of His love to us, according as we find love to work
in ourselves to others. Hence he sets forth his love to us, by
borrowing from us instances of our love to wife and children (Eph
5:25). Yea, he sometimes sets forth his love to us, by calling to
our mind how sometimes a man loves a woman that is a whore, "Go,"
(saith God to the prophet) "love a woman beloved of her friend,
yet an adulteress, according to the word of the Lord toward the
children of Israel, who look to other gods, and love flagons of
wine." (Hosea 3:1) But then, these things must not be understood
with respect to the nature, but the dispensations and manifestations
of love; no, nor with reference to these neither, any further than
by making use of such suitable similitudes, thereby to commend his
love to us, and thereby to beget in us affections to him for the
love bestowed upon us. Wherefore Christ's love must be considered
both with respect to the essence, and also as to the divers
workings of it. For the essence thereof, it is as I said, natural
with himself, and as such, it is the root and ground of all those
actions of his, whereby he hath shewed that himself is loving to
sinful man. But now, though the love that is in him is essential
to his nature, and can vary no more than God himself: yet we see
not this love but by the fruits of it, nor can it otherwise be
discerned. "Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid
down his life for us" (1 John 3:16). We must then betake ourselves
to the discoveries of this love, of which there are two sorts;
[namely,] such as are the foundations, and such as are the
consequences of those fundamental acts. Those which I call the
foundations, are they upon which all other discoveries of his
goodness depend, and they are two. 1. His dying for us. 2. His
improving of his death for us at the right hand of God.

Third, And this leads me to the third particular, to wit, to shew
you what the love of Christ is; namely, in the discovery of it.
And to know the love of Christ.

The love of Christ is made known unto us, as I said, First, By his
dying for us. Second, By his improving of his dying for us.

1. His dying for us appears, (1.) To be wonderful in itself. (2.)
In his preparations for that work.

(1.) It appears to be wonderful in itself, and that both with
respect to the nature of that death, as also, with respect to the
persons for whom he so died.

The love of Christ appears to be wonderful by the death he died: In
that he died, in that he died such a death. 'Twas strange love in
Christ that moved him to die for us: strange, because not according
to the custom of the world. Men do not use, in cool blood,
deliberately to come upon the stage or ladder, to lay down their
lives for others; but this did Jesus Christ, and that too for such,
whose qualification, if it be duly considered, will make this act
of his, far more amazing, He laid down his life for his enemies
(Rom 5), and for those that could not abide him; yea, for those,
even for those that brought him to the cross: not accidentally, or
because it happened so, but knowingly, designedly, (Zech 12:10),
he knew it was for those he died, and yet his love led him to lay
down his life for them. I will add, That those very people for
whom he laid down his life, though they by all sorts of carriages
did what they could to provoke him to pray to God his Father,
that he would send and cut them off by the flaming sword of angels
(Matt 26:53), would not be provoked, but would lay down his life
for them. Nor must I leave off here: We never read that Jesus
Christ was more cheerful in all his life on earth, than when he
was going to lay down his life for them, now he thanked God (Luke
22:19), now he sang (Matt 26:30).

But this is not all. He did not only die, but died such a death,
as indeed cannot be expressed. He was content to be counted the
sinner: yea, to be counted the sin of the sinner, nor could this
but be odious to so holy a Lamb as he was, yet willing to be this
and thus for that love that he bare to men.

This being thus, it follows, that his sufferings must be inconceivable;
for that, what in justice was the proper wages of sin and sinners,
he must undergo; and what that was can no man so well know as
he himself and damned spirits; for the proper wages of sin, and
of sinners for their sin, is that death which layeth pains, such
pains which it deserveth upon the man that dieth so: But Christ
died so, and consequently was seized by those pains not only in
body but in soul. His tears, his cries, his bloody sweat (Luke
22:44), the hiding of his Father's face; yea, God's forsaking of
him in his extremity (Matt 27:46), plainly enough declares the
nature of the death he died (Mark 15:39). For my part, I stand
amazed at those that would not have the world believe, that the
death of Jesus Christ was, in itself, so terrible as it was.

I will not stand here to discourse of the place called Hell, where
the spirits of the damned are, we are discoursing of the nature of
Christ's sufferings: and I say, if Christ was put into the very
capacity of one that must suffer what in justice ought to be
inflicted for sin; then, how we can so diminish the greatness of
his sufferings, as some do, without undervaluing of the greatness
of his love, I know not; and how they will answer it, I know not.
And on the contrary, what if I should say, that the soul of Christ
suffered as long as his body lay in the grave, and that God's
loosing of the pains of death at Christ's resurrection, must not
so much be made mention of with reference to his body, as to his
soul, if to his body at all. For what pain of death was his body
capable of, when his soul was separate from it? (Acts 2:24) And
yet God's loosing the pains of death, seems to be but an immediate
antecedent to his rising from the dead. And this sense Peter doth
indeed seem to pursue, saying, "For David speaketh concerning him;
I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right
hand, that I should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice,
and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope,
because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou
suffer thine holy one to see corruption" (Acts 2:25-27). This,
saith Peter, was not spoken of David, but he being a prophet,
and knowing that God had sworn with an oath, that of the fruit of
his loins according to the flesh he would raise up Christ to sit
on his throne (verse 29,30): He seeing this before, spake of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither
did his flesh see corruption (verse 31). "Thou wilt not leave my
soul in hell"; his soul was not left in hell. Of what use are these
expressions, if the soul of Christ suffered not, if it suffered
not when separated from the body? for of that time the Apostle
Peter seems to treat. Besides, if it be not improper to say, that
soul was not left there, that never was there, I am at a loss. Thou
wilt not leave, his soul was not left there; ergo, It was there,
seems to be the natural conclusion. If it be objected, that by
hell is meant the grave, 'tis foolish to think that the soul of
Christ lay there while his body lay dead therein. But again, the
Apostle seems clearly to distinguish between the places where the
soul and body of Christ was; counting his body to be in the grave,
and his soul, for the time, in hell. If there be objected what
was said by him to the thief upon the cross (Luke 23:43), I can
answer, Christ might speak that with reference to his God-head,
and if so, that lies as no objection to what hath been insinuated.
And why may not that be so understood, as well as where he said,
when on earth, "The Son of man which is in heaven" (John 3:13),
meaning himself. For the personality of the Son of God, call him
Son of man, or what other term is fitting, resideth not in the
human, but divine nature of Jesus Christ. However, since hell
is sometimes taken for the place (Acts 1:25), sometimes for the
grave, sometimes for the state (Psa 116:3), and sometimes but for
a figure of the place where the damned are tormented (Jonah 2:2);
I will not strictly assign to Christ the place, the prison where
the damned spirits are (1 Peter 3:19), but will say, as I said
before, that he was put into the place of sinners, into the sins
of sinners, and received what by justice was the proper wages of
sin both in body and soul: As is evident from that 53rd of Isaiah
(verse 10,11). This soul of his I take to be that which the inwards
and the fat of the burnt sacrifices was a figure, or shadow of.
"And the fat and the inwards were burnt upon the altar, whilst
the body was burned for sin without the camp" (Exo 29:13,14, Lev
8:14-17).

And now having said this much, wherein have I derogated from the
glory and holiness of Christ? Yea, I have endeavoured to set forth
something of the greatness of his sorrows, the odiousness of sin,
the nature of justice, and the love of Christ. And be sure, by how
much the sufferings of the Son of God abounded for us, by so much
was this unsearchable love of Christ made manifest. Nor can they
that would, before the people, pare away, and make but little these
infinite sufferings of our Lord, make his love to be so great as
they ought, let them use what rhetoric they can. For their objecting
the odious names and place of hell, accounting it not to be fit to
say, That so holy a person as the Son of God was there. I answer,
though I have not asserted it, yet let me ask, which is more
odious, hell or sin? Or whether such think that Christ Jesus was
subject to be tainted by the badness of the place, had he been
there? Or whether, when the scripture says, God is in hell, it
is any disparagement to him? (Psa 139:8) Or if a man should be so
bold as to say so, Whether by so saying, he confineth Christ to
that place for ever? And whether by so thinking he has contradicted
that called the Apostles' creed?6

(2.) Having thus spoken of the death and sufferings of Christ,
I shall in the next place speak of his preparations for his so
suffering for us; and by so doing, yet shew you something more of
the greatness of his love.

Christ, as I have told you, was even before his sufferings, a person
of no mean generation, being the Son of the eternal God: Neither
had his Father any more such sons but he; consequently he of right
was heir of all things, and so to have dominion over all worlds.
For, "for him were all things created" (Col 1:16). And hence all
creatures are subject to him; yea the angels of God worship him
(Heb 1). Wherefore as so considered, he augmented not his state
by becoming lower than the angels for us, for what can be added
to him, that is naturally God. Indeed he did take, for our sakes,
the human nature into union with himself, and so began to manifest
his glory; and the kindness that he had for us before all worlds,
began now eminently to shew itself. Had this Christ of God, our
friend, given all he had to save us, had not his love been wonderful?
But when he shall give for us himself, this is more wonderful. But
this is not all, the case was so betwixt God and man, that this
Son of God could not, as he was before the world was, give himself
a ransom for us, he being altogether incapable so to do, being
such an one as could not be subject to death, the condition that
we by sin had put ourselves into.

Wherefore that which would have been a death to some, to wit, the
laying aside of glory and becoming, of the King of princes, a
servant of the meanest form; this he of his own good-will, was
heartily content to do. Wherefore, he that once was the object
of the fear of angels, is now become a little creature, a worm,
an inferior one (Psa 22:6), born of a woman, brought forth in a
stable, laid in a manger (Luke 2:7), scorned of men, tempted of
devils (Luke 4:2), was beholden to his creatures for food, for
raiment, for harbour, and a place wherein to lay his head when
dead. In a word, he "made himself of no reputation, took upon him
the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men" (Phil
2:7), that he might become capable to do this kindness for us.
And it is worth your noting, that all the while that he was in the
world, putting himself upon those other preparations which were
to be antecedent to his being made a sacrifice for us, no man,
though he told what he came about to many, had, as we read of, an
heart once to thank him for what he came about (Isa 53:3). No,
they railed on him, they degraded him, they called him devil,
they said he was mad, and a deceiver, a blasphemer of God, and a
rebel against the state: They accused him to the governor; yea,
one of his disciples sold him, another denied him, and they all
forsook him, and left him to shift for himself in the hands of
his horrible enemies; who beat him with their fists, spat on him,
mocked him, crowned him with thorns, scourged him, made a gazing
stock of him, and finally, hanged him up by the hands and the feet
alive, and gave him vinegar to increase his affliction, when he
complained that his anguish had made him thirsty. And yet all this
could not take his heart off the work of our redemption. To die
he came, die he would, and die he did before he made his return
to the Father, for our sins, that we might live through him.
7 Nor may what we read of in the word concerning those temporal
sufferings that he underwent be over-looked, and passed by without
serious consideration; they being a part of the curse that our sin
had deserved! For all temporal plagues are due to our sin while we
live, as well as the curse of God to everlasting perdition, when
we die. Wherefore this is the reason why the whole life of the
Lord Jesus was such a life of affliction and sorrow, he therein
bare our sicknesses, and took upon him our deserts: So that now
the curse in temporals, as well as the curse in spirituals, and
of everlasting malediction, is removed by him away from God's
people; and since he overcame them, and got to the cross, it was
by reason of the worthiness of the humble obedience that he yielded
to his Father's law in our flesh. For his whole life (as well as
his death) was a life of merit and purchase, and desert. Hence it
is said, "he increased in favour with God" (Luke 2:52). For his
works made him still more acceptable to him: For he standing in the
room of man, and becoming our reconciler to God; by the heavenly
majesty he was counted as such, and so got for us what he earned
by his mediatory works; and also partook thereof as he was our
head himself. And was there not in all these things love, and
love that was infinite? Love which was not essential to his divine
nature, could never have carried him through so great a work as
this: Passions here would a failed, would a retreated, and have
given the recoil; yea, his very humanity would here have flagged
and fainted, had it not been managed, governed, and strengthened
by his eternal Spirit. Wherefore it is said, that "through the
eternal Spirit he offered himself without spot to God" (Heb 9:14).
And that he was declared to be the Son of God, with so doing, and
by the resurrection from the dead (Rom 1:4).

2. We come now to the second thing propounded, and by which his
love is discovered, and that is his improving of his dying for
us. But I must crave pardon of my reader, if he thinks that I
can discover the ten hundred thousandth part thereof, for it is
impossible; but my meaning is, to give a few hints what beginnings
of improvement he made thereof, in order to his further progress
therein.

(1.) Therefore, This his death for us, was so virtuous, that in the
space of three days and three nights, it reconciled to God in the
body of his flesh as a common person, all, and every one of God's
elect. Christ, when he addressed himself to die, presented himself
to the justice of the law, as a common person; standing in the
sted, place, and room of all that he undertook for; He gave "his
life a ransom for many" (Matt 20:28). "He came into the world to
save sinners" (1 Tim 1:15). And as he thus presented himself, so
God, his Father, admitted him to this work; and therefore it is
said, "The Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all": And again,
"surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows" (Isa
53:4,6,12). Hence it unavoidably follows, that whatever he felt,
and underwent in the manner, or nature, or horribleness of the
death he died, he felt and underwent all as a common person; that
is, as he stood in the sted of others: Therefore it is said, "He
was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities";
and that "the chastisement of our peace was upon him" (Isa 53:5).
And again "the just died for the unjust" (1 Peter 3:18).

Now then, if he presented himself as a common person to justice,
if God so admitted and accounted him, if also he laid the sins
of the people, whose persons he represented, upon him, and under
that consideration punishes him with those punishments and death,
that he died. Then Christ in life and death is concluded by the
Father to live and die as a common or public person, representing
all in this life and death, for whom he undertook thus to live,
and thus to die. So then, it must needs be, that what next befalls
this common person, it befalls him with respect to them in whose
room and place he stood and suffered. Now, the next that follows,
is, "that he is justified of God": That is, acquitted and discharged
from this punishment, for the sake of the worthiness of his death
and merits; for that must be before he could be raised from the
dead (Acts 2:24): God raised him not up as guilty, to justify him
afterwards: His resurrection was the declaration of his precedent
justification. He was raised from the dead, because it was neither
in equity or justice possible that he should be holden longer
there, his merits procured the contrary.

Now he was condemned of God's law, and died by the hand of justice,
he was acquitted by God's law, and justified of justice; and all
as a common person; so then, in his acquitting, we are acquitted,
in his justification we are justified; and therefore the Apostle
applieth God's justifying of Christ to himself; and that rightly
(Isa 50:8, Rom 8:33,34). For if Christ be my undertaker, will stand
in my place, and do for me, 'tis but reasonable that I should be
a partaker: Wherefore we are also said to be "quickened together
with him" (Eph 2:5): That is, when he was quickened in the grave;
raised up together, and made to sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. Therefore another scripture saith, "Hath He quickened
you--together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses" (Col
2:13). This quickening, must not be understood of the renovation
of our hearts, but of the restoring of Jesus Christ to life after
he was crucified; and we are said to be quickened together with
him, because we were quickened in him at his death, and were to
fall or stand by him quite through the three days and three nights
work; and were to take therefore our lot with him: Wherefore it
is said again, That his resurrection is our justification (Rom
4:25). That by one offering he has purged our sins for ever (Heb
10:12); and that by his death he hath "delivered us from the wrath
to come" (1 Thess 1:10). But I say, I would be understood aright:
This life resideth yet in the Son, and is communicated from him
to us, as we are called to believe his word; mean while we are
secured from wrath and hell, being justified in his justification,
quickened in his quickening, raised up in his resurrection; and
made to sit already together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus!
8 And is not this a glorious improvement of his death, that after
two days the whole body of the elect, in him, should be revived,
and that in the third day we should live in the sight of God, in
and by him (Heb 6:18-20).

(2.) Another improvement of his death for us, was this, By that he
slew for us, our infernal foes; by it he abolished death (2 Tim
1:1); by death he destroyed him that had the power of death (Heb
2:14): By death he took away the sting of death (1 Cor 15:55,56);
by death he made death a pleasant sleep to saints, and the grave
for a while, an easy house and home for the body. By death he
made death such an advantage to us, that it is become a means of
translating of the souls of them that believe in him, to life.
And all this is manifest, for that death is ours, a blessing to
us, as well as Paul and Apollos, the world and life itself (1 Cor
3:22). And that all this is done for us by his death, is apparent,
for that his person is where it is, and that by himself as a common
person he has got the victory for us. For though as yet all things
are not put under our feet, yet we see Jesus crowned with honour
and glory, who by the grace of God tasteth death for every man.
"For it became God, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through
sufferings" (Heb 2:7-10). It became him; that is, it was but just
and right, he should do so, if there was enough in the virtuousness
of his death and blood to require such a thing. But there was so.
Wherefore God has exalted him, and us in him, above these infernal
foes. Let us therefore see ourselves delivered from death first,
by the exaltation of our Jesus, let us behold him I say as crowned
with glory and honour, as, or because, he tasted death for us.
And then we shall see ourselves already in heaven by our head,
our undertaker, our Jesus, our Saviour.

(3.) Another improvement that has already been made of his death
for us, is thus, he hath at his entrance into the presence of God,
for his worthiness sake, obtained that the Holy Ghost should be
given unto him for us, that we by that might in all things, yet
to be done, be made meet to be partakers personally, in ourselves,
as well as virtually by our head and forerunner, of the inheritance
of the saints in light. Wherefore the abundant pourings out of
that was forborn until the resurrection, and glorification of our
Lord Jesus. "For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that
Jesus was not yet glorified" (John 7:39). Nor was it given so soon
as received: for he received it upon his entering into the holy
place, when he had sprinkled the mercy seat with the blood of
sprinkling, but it was not given out to us till sometimes after
(Acts 4): however it was obtained before (Acts 2:32,33). And it
was meet that it should in that infinite immeasurableness in which
he received it, first abide upon him, that his human nature, which
was the first fruits of the election of God, might receive by its
abidings upon him, that glory for which it was ordained; and that
we might receive, as we receive all other things, first by our
head and undertaker, sanctification in the fullness of it. Hence
it is written, that as he is made unto us of God, wisdom, and
righteousness, and redemption, so sanctification too (1 Cor 1:30):
For first we are sanctified in his flesh, as we are justified by
his righteousness. Wherefore he is that holy one that setteth us,
in himself, a holy lump before God, not only with reference to
justification and life, but with reference to sanctification and
holiness: For we that are elect, are all considered in him as he
has received that, as well as in that he has taken possession of
the heaven for us. I count not this all the benefit that accrueth
to us by Jesus his receiving the Holy Ghost, at his entrance into
the presence of God for us: For we also are to receive it ourselves
from him, according as by God we are placed in the body at the
times appointed of the Father. That we, as was said, may receive
personal quickening, personal renovation, personal sanctification;
and in conclusion, glory. But I say, for that he hath received
this holy Spirit to himself, he received it as the effect of his
ascension, which was the effect of his resurrection, and of the
merit of his death and passion. And he received it as a common
person, as a head and undertaker for the people.

(4.) Another improvement that has been made of his death, and of
the merits thereof for us, is that he has obtained to be made of
God, the chief and high Lord of heaven and earth, for us, (All this
while we speak of the exaltation of the human nature, in, by, and
with which, the Son of God became capable to be our reconciler
unto God). "All things," saith he, "are delivered unto me of my
Father. And all power in heaven and earth is given unto me"; and
all this because he died. "He humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross; wherefore God hath highly
exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, of things
in earth, or things under the earth: and that every tongue shall
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father"
(Phil 2). And all this is, as was said afore, for our sakes. He
has given him to be head over all things to the church (Eph 1:22).

Wherefore, whoever is set up on earth, they are set up by our Lord.
"By me," saith he, "kings reign, and princes decree justice. By
me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth"
(Prov 8:15,16). Nor are they when set up, left to do, though they
should desire it, their own will and pleasure. The Metheg-Ammah,9
the bridle, is in his own hand, and he giveth reins, or check,
even as it pleaseth him (2 Sam 8:1), He has this power, for the
well-being of his people. Nor are the fallen angels exempted from
being put under his rebuke: He is the "only potentate" (1 Tim 6:15),
and in his times will shew it, Peter tells us, he "is gone into
heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels, and authorities,
and powers being made subject unto him" (1 Peter 3:22).

This power, as I said, he has received for the sake of his church
on earth, and for her conduct and well-being among the sons of
men. Hence, as he is called the king of nations, in general (Jer
10:7); so the King of saints, in special (Rev 15:3): and as he is
said to be head over all things in general; so to his church in
special.

(5.) Another improvement that he hath made of his death for us,
is, he hath obtained, and received into his own hand sufficiency
of gifts to make ministers for his church withal. I say, to make
and maintain, in opposition to all that would hinder, a sufficient
ministry (1 Cor 12:28-30). Wherefore he saith, "When he ascended
on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. And he
gave some Apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some pastors
and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of
the ministry, for edifying of the body of Christ. Until we all come
in the unity of the faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto
a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ" (Eph 4:8-14). Many ways has Satan devised to bring into
contempt this blessed advantage that Christ has received of God
for the benefit of his church; partly while he stirs up persons
to revile the sufficiency of the Holy Ghost, as to this thing:
partly, while he stirs up his own limbs and members, to broach
his delusions in the world, in the name of Christ, and as they
blasphemously call it by the assistance of the Holy Ghost;10 partly
while he tempteth novices in their faith, to study and labour in
nice distinctions, and the affecting of uncouth expressions, that
vary from the form of sound words, thereby to get applause, and
a name, a forerunner of their own destruction (John 3:6).

But, notwithstanding all this, "Wisdom is justified of her children"
(Matt 11:19): and at the last day, when the outside, and inside
of all things shall be seen and compared, it will appear that the
Son of God has so managed his own servants in the ministry of his
word, and so managed his word, while they have been labouring in
it, as to put in his blessing by that, upon the souls of sinners,
and has blown away all other things as chaff (James 1:18).

(6.) Another improvement that the Lord Christ has made of his
death, for his, is the obtaining, and taking possession of heaven
for them. "By his own blood he entered in once into the holy
place, having obtained eternal redemption for us" (Heb 9:12). This
heaven! who knows what it is? (Matt 22:23) This glory! who knows
what it is? It is called God's throne, God's house (John 14:2),
God's habitation; paradise (2 Cor 12:4), the kingdom of God, the
high and holy place (Isa 57:15). Abraham's bosom (Luke 16:22),
and the place of heavenly pleasures (Psa 16:11); in this heaven
is to be found, the face of God for ever (Psa 41:12): Immortality,
the person of Christ, the prophets, the angels, the revelation of
all mysteries, the knowledge of all the elect, ETERNITY.

Of this heaven, as was said afore, we are possessed already, we are
in it, we are set down in it, and partake already of the benefits
thereof, but all by our head and undertaker; and 'tis fit that
we should believe this, rejoice in this, talk of this, tell one
another of this, and live in the expectation of our own personal
enjoyment of it. And as we should do all this, so we should bless
and praise the name of God who has put over this house, this
kingdom, and inheritance into the hand of so faithful a friend.
Yea, a brother, a Saviour and blessed undertaker for us. And
lastly, since all these things already mentioned, are the fruit
of the sufferings of our Jesus, and his sufferings the fruit of
that love of his that passeth knowledge: how should we bow the
knee before him, and call him tender Father; yea, how should we
love and obey him, and devote ourselves unto his service, and be
willing to be also sufferers for his sake, to whom be honour and
glory for ever. And thus much of the love of Christ in general.

I might here add many other things, but as I told you before,
we would under the head but now touched upon, treat about the
fundamentals or great and chief parts thereof, [Christ's love] and
then.

SECOND, Of the exceeding greatness of it more particularly: Wherefore
of that we must say something now.

And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge. In that it
is said to pass knowledge, 'tis manifest it is exceeding great, or
greatly going beyond what can be known; for to exceed, is to go
beyond, be above, or to be out of the reach of what would comprehend
that which is so. And since the expression is absolutely indefinite,
and respecteth not the knowledge of this or the other creature
only: it is manifest, that Paul by his thus saying, challengeth
all creatures in heaven and earth to find out the bottom of this
love if they can. The love of Christ which passeth knowledge. I will
add, that forasmuch as he is indefinite also about the knowledge,
as well as about the persons knowing, it is out of doubt that he
here engageth all knowledge, in what enlargements, attainments,
improvements, and heights soever it hath, or may for ever attain
unto. It passeth knowledge (Eph 3:19).

Of the same import also is that other passage of the Apostle a
little above in the self-same chapter. I preach, saith he, among
the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ: or those riches of
Christ that cannot by searching, be found out in the all of them:
The riches, the riches of his love and grace. The riches of his
love and grace towards us. "For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became
poor, that ye through his poverty might be made 11 rich" (2 Cor
8:9). Ye know the grace, that is so far, and so far every believer
knows it: for that his leaving heaven and taking upon him flesh,
that he might bring us thither, is manifest to all. But yet,
all the grace that was wrapped up in that amazing condescension,
knoweth none, nor can know: for if that might be, that possibility
would be a flat contradiction to the text: "The love of Christ
which passeth knowledge." Wherefore the riches of this love
in the utmost of it, is not, cannot be known by any: let their
understanding and knowledge, be heightened and improved what it
may. Yea, and being heightened and improved, let what search there
can by it be made into this love and grace. "That which is afar
off, and exceeding deep, who can find out?" (Eccl 7:24) And that
this love of Christ is so, shall anon be made more apparent. But
at present we will proceed to particular challenges for the making
out of this, and then we will urge those reasons that will be for
the further confirmation of the whole.

First, This love passes the knowledge of the wisest saint, we now
single out the greatest proficient in this knowledge; and to confirm
this, I need go no further than to the man that spake these words;
to wit, Paul, for in his conclusion he includes himself. The love
of Christ which passeth knowledge, even my knowledge. As who should
say; though I have waded a great way in the grace of Christ, and
have as much experience of his love as any he in all the world,
yet I confess myself short, as to the fullness that is therein,
nor will I stick to conclude of any other, That "he knows nothing
yet as he ought to know" (1 Cor 8:2, 13:12).

Second, This love passeth the knowledge of all the saints, were
it all put together, we, we all, and every one, did we each of us
contribute for the manifesting of this love, what it is, the whole
of what we know, it would amount but to a broken knowledge; we know
but in part, we see darkly (1 Cor 13:9-12), we walk not by sight,
but faith (2 Cor 5:7). True, now we speak of saints on earth.

Third, But we will speak of saints in heaven; they cannot to the
utmost, know this love of Christ. For though they know more thereof
than saints on earth, because they are more in the open visions
of it, and also are more enlarged, being spirits perfect, than we
on earth. Yet, to say no more now, they do not see the rich and
unsearchable runnings out thereof unto sinners here on earth. Nor
may they there measure that, to others, by what they themselves
knew of it here. For sins, and times and persons and other
circumstances, may much alter the case, but were all the saints
on earth, and all the saints in heaven to contribute all that
they know of this love of Christ, and to put it into one sum of
knowledge, they would greatly come short of knowing the utmost of
this love, for that there is an infinite deal of this love, yet
unknown by them. 'Tis said plainly, that they on earth do not yet
know what they shall be (1 John 3:2). And as for them in heaven,
they are not yet made perfect as they shall be (Heb 11:39,40).
Besides, we find the souls under the altar, how perfect now
soever, when compared with that state they were in when with the
body (Isa 63:16); yet are not able in all points, though in glory,
to know, and so to govern themselves there without directions
(Rev 6:9-11). I say, they are not able, without directions and
instructions, to know the kinds and manner of workings of the love
of Christ towards us that dwell on earth.

Fourth, We will join with these, the angels, and when all of them,
with men, have put all and every whit of what they know of this
love of Christ together, they must come far short of reaching to,
or of understanding the utmost bound thereof. I grant, that angels
do know, in some certain parts of knowledge of the love of Christ,
more than saints on earth can know while here; but then again, I
know that even they do also learn many things of saints on earth,
which shews that themselves know also but in part (Eph 3:10);
so then, all, as yet, as to this love of Christ, and the utmost
knowledge of it, are but as so many imperfects (1 Peter 1:12), nor
can they all, put all their imperfects together, make up a perfect
knowledge of this love of Christ; for the texts do yet stand where
they did, and say, his riches are unsearchable, and his love that
which passeth knowledge. We will come now to shew you, besides
what has been already touched on.

THE REASON why this riches is unsearchable, and that love such as
passeth knowledge; and the

Reason First is, Because It is eternal. All that is eternal, has
attending of it, as to the utmost knowledge of it, a fourfold
impossibility. 1. It is without beginning. 2. It is without end.
3. It is infinite. 4. It is incomprehensible.

1. It is without beginning: That which was before the world was,
is without a beginning, but the love of Christ was before the
world.

This is evident from Proverbs the eighth, "his delights," before
God had made the world, are there said to be, "with the sons of
men." Not that we then had being, for we were as yet uncreated;
but though we had not beings created, we had being in the love and
affections of Jesus Christ. Now this love of Christ must needs,
as to the fullness of it, as to the utmost of it, be absolutely
unknown to man. Who can tell how many heart-pleasing thoughts Christ
had of us before the world began? Who can tell how much he then
was delighted in that being we had in his affections; as also, in
the consideration of our beings, believings, and being with him
afterwards.

In general we may conclude, it was great; for there seems to be
a parallel betwixt his Father's delights in him, and his delights
in us. "I was daily his delight,--any my delights were with the
sons of men" (Prov 8:22,30,31). But I say, who can tell, who can
tell altogether, what and how much the Father delighted in his
Son before the world began? Who can tell what kind of delight the
Father had in the Son before the world began? Why there seems to
be a parallel betwixt the Father's love to Christ, and Christ's
love to us; the Father's delight in Christ, and his delight in
us. Yea, Christ confirms it, saying, "As the Father hath loved me,
so have I loved you, continue ye in my love" (John 15:9). I know
that I am not yet upon the nature of the word eternal; yet since,
by eternal, we understand, before the world began, as well as
forward, to an endless forever: We may a little enquire of folks
as they may read, if they can tell the kind or measure of the love
wherewith Christ then loved us. I remember the question that God
asked Job, "Where," saith he, "wast thou when I laid the foundation
of the earth? declare if thou hast understanding" (Job 38:4): Thereby
insinuating that because it was done before he had his being,
therefore he could not tell how it was done. Now, if a work so
visible, as the creation is, is yet as to the manner of the workmanship
thereof wholly unknown to them that commenced in their beings
afterwards: How shall that which has, in all the circumstances of
it, been more hidden and inward, be found out by them that have
intelligence thereof by the ear, and but in part, and that in a
mystery, and long afterwards. But to conclude this, That which is
eternal is without all beginning. This was presented to consideration
before, and therefore it cannot to perfection be known.

2. That which is eternal is without end, and how can an endless
thing be known, that which has no end has no middle, wherefore
it is impossible that the one half of the love that Christ has
for his church should ever by them be known. I know that those
visions that the saved shall have in heaven of this love, will far
transcend our utmost knowledge here, even as far as the light of
the sun at noon, goes beyond the light of a blinking candle at
midnight; and hence it is, that when the days of those visions
are come, the knowledge that we now have, shall be swallowed up.
"When that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part
shall be done away" (1 Cor 13:10). And although he speaks here of
perfections, "when that which is perfect is come," &c., yet even
that perfection must not be thought to be such as is the perfection
of God; for then should all that are saved be so many externals
and so many infinites, as he is infinite. But the meaning is,
we shall then be with the eternal, shall immediately enjoy him
with all the perfection of knowledge, as far as is possible for
a creature, when he is wrought up to the utmost height that his
created substance will bear to be capable of. But for all that,
this perfection will yet come short of the perfection of him that
made him, and consequently, short of knowing the utmost of his
love; since that in the root is his very essence and nature. I
know it says also, that we shall know even as we are known. But
yet this must not be understood, as if we should know God as fully
as he knows us. It would be folly and madness so to conclude; but
the meaning is, we are known for happiness; we are known of God,
for heaven and felicity; and when that which is perfect is come,
then shall we perfectly know, and enjoy that for which we are
now known of God. And this is that which the Apostle longed for,
namely, If by any means, he might apprehend that for which he was
also apprehended of Christ Jesus (Phil 3:12). That is, know, and
see that, unto the which he was appointed of God and apprehended
of Christ Jesus. 'Tis said again, "We shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is" (1 John 3:2). This text has respect to
the Son, as to his humanity, and not as to his divinity. And not
as to his divinity, simply, or distinctly considered; for as to
that it is as possible for a spirit to drink up the sea, as for
the most enlarged saint that is, or ever shall be in glory, so to
see God as to know him altogether, to the utmost, or throughout.
But the humanity of the Son of God, we shall see throughout, in
all the beauty and glory that is upon him; and that was prepared
for him before the foundation of the world. And Christ will that
we see this glory, when he takes us up in glory to himself (John
17:24); but the utmost boundlessness of the divine majesty, the
eternal deity of the Son of God, cannot be known to the utmost
or altogether. I do not doubt, but that there will then in him,
I mean in Christ, and in us, break forth these glorious rays
and beams of the eternal majesty, as will make him in each of us
admirable one to another (2 Thess 1:10); and that then, that of
God shall be known of us, that now never entered into our hearts
to think of. But the whole, is not, cannot, shall never be fully
known of any. And therefore the love of Christ, it being essential
to himself, cannot be known because of the endlessness that is in
it. I said before, that which has no end, has no middle, how then
shall those that shall be in heaven eternally, ever pass over half
the breadth of eternity. True, I know that all enjoyments there
will be enjoyments eternal. Yea, that whatever we shall there
embrace, or what embraces we shall be embraced with, shall be
eternal; but I put a difference betwixt that which is eternal, as
to the nature, and that which is so as to the durableness thereof.
The nature of eternal things we shall enjoy, so soon as ever we
come to heaven, but the duration of eternal things, them we shall
never be able to pass through, for they are endless. So then, the
eternal love of Christ, as to the nature of it, will be perfectly
known of saints, when they shall dwell in heaven; but the endlessness
thereof they shall never attain unto. And this will be their
happiness. For could it be, that we should in heaven ever reach
the end of our blessedness: (as we should, could we reach to the
end of this love of Christ) why then, as the saying is, We should
be at the land's end, and feel the bottom of all our enjoyments.
Besides, whatsoever has an end, has a time to decay, and to
cease to be, as well as to have a time to shew forth its highest
excellencies. Wherefore, from all these considerations it is most
manifest, that the love of Christ is unsearchable, and that it
passes knowledge.

3. and 4. Now the other two things follow of course, to wit, That
this love is infinite and incomprehensible. Wherefore here is that
that still is above and beyond even those that are arrived to the
utmost of their perfections. And this, if I may so say, will keep
them in an employ, even when they are in heaven; though not an
employ that is laboursome, tiresome, burdensome, yet an employ
that is dutiful, delightful and profitable; for although the work
and worship of saints in heaven is not particularly revealed as
yet, and so "it doth not yet appear what we shall be," yet in the
general we may say, there will be that for them to do, that has
not yet by them been done, and by that work which they shall do
there, their delight will be delight unto them. The law was the
shadow and not the very image of heavenly things (Heb 10:1). The
image is an image, and not the heavenly things themselves (the
heavenly things they are saints) there shall be worship in the
heavens (Heb 9:23). Nor will this at all derogate from their glory.
The angels now wait upon God and serve him (Psa 103:20); the Son
of God, is now a minister, and waiteth upon his service in heaven
(Heb 8:1,2); some saints have been employed about service for God
after they have been in heaven (Luke 9:29-32); and why we should
be idle spectators, when we come thither, I see not reason to
believe. It may be said, "They there rest from their labours."
True, but not from their delights. All things then that once were
burdensome, whether in suffering or service, shall be done away,
and that which is delightful and pleasurable shall remain. But
then will be a time to receive, and not to work. True, if by work
you mean such as we now count work; but what if our work be there,
to receive and bless. The fishes in the sea do drink, swim and
drink. But for a further discourse of this, let that alone till
we come thither. But to come down again into the world, for now
we are talking of things aloft:

Reason Second, This love of Christ must needs be beyond our
knowledge, because we cannot possibly know the utmost of our sin.
Sin is that which sets out, and off, the knowledge of the love
of Christ. There are four things that must be spoken to for the
clearing of this. 1. The nature of sin. 2. The aggravations of sin.
3. The utmost tendencies of sin. 4. And the perfect knowledge of
all this.

1. Before we can know this love of Christ, as afore, we must
necessarily know the nature of sin, that is, what sin is, what sin
is in itself. But no man knows the nature of sin to the full; not
what sin in itself is to the full. The Apostle saith, "That sin,
[that is in itself] is exceeding sinful" (Rom 7:13). That is,
exceeding it as to its filthiness, goes beyond our knowledge: But
this is seen by the commandment. Now the reason why none can, to
the full, know the horrible nature of sin, is because none, to the
full, can know the blessed nature of the blessed God. For sin is
the opposite to God. There is nothing that seeketh absolutely,
and in its own nature to overcome, and to annihilate God, but sin,
and sin doth so. Sin is worse than the devil; he therefore that
is more afraid of the devil than of sin, knows not the badness
of sin as he ought; nor but little of the love of Jesus Christ.
He that knows not what sin would have done to the world, had not
Christ stepped betwixt those harms and it. How can he know so much
as the extent of the love of Christ in common? And he that knows
not what sin would have done to him in particular, had not Christ
the Lord, stepped in and saved, cannot know the utmost of the love
of Christ to him in particular. Sin therefore in the utmost evil
of it, cannot be known of us: so consequently the love of Christ
in the utmost goodness of it, cannot be known of us.

Besides, there are many sins committed by us, dropping from us,
and that pollute us, that we are not at all aware of; how then
should we know that love of Christ by which we are delivered from
them? Lord, "who can understand his errors?" said David (Psa
19:12). Consequently, who can understand the love that saves him
from them? moreover, he that knows the love of Christ to the full,
must also know to the full that wrath and anger of God, that like
hell itself, burneth against sinners for the sake of sin: but this
knows none. Lord, "who knoweth the power of thine anger?" said
Moses (Psa 90:11). Therefore none knows this love of Christ to
the full. The nature of sin is to get into our good, to mix itself
with our good, to lie lurking many times under the formality and
shew of good; and that so close, so cunningly, and invisibly,
that the party concerned, embraces it for virtue, and knows not
otherwise to do; and yet from this he is saved by the love of
Christ; and therefore, as was hinted but now, if a man doth not
know the nature of his wound, how should he know the nature and
excellency of the balsam that hath cured him of his wound.

2. There are the due aggravations that belong to sin, which men
are unacquainted with; it was one of the great things that the
prophets were concerned with from God towards the people, (as to
shew them their sins, so) to shew them what aggravations did belong
thereto (Jer 2, Jer 3, Eze 16).

There are sins against light, sins against knowledge, sins against
love, sins against learning, sins against threatenings, sins
against promises, vows and resolutions, sins against experience,
sins against examples of anger, and sins that have great, and
high, and strange aggravations attending of them; the which we are
ignorant of, though not altogether, yet in too great a measure.
Now if these things be so, how can the love that saveth us from
them be known or understood to the full?

Alas! our ignorance of these things is manifest by our unwillingness
to abide affliction, by our secret murmuring under the hand of
God; by our wondering why we are so chastised as we are, by our
thinking long that the affliction is no sooner removed.

Or, if our ignorance of the vileness of our actions is not manifest
this way, yet it is in our lightness under our guilt, our slight
thoughts of our doings, our slovenly doing of duties, and asking
of forgiveness after some evil or unbecoming actions. 'Tis to
no boot to be particular, the whole course of our lives doth too
fully make it manifest, that we are wonderful short in knowing
both the nature, and also the aggravations of our sins: and how
then should we know that love of Christ in its full dimensions,
by which we are saved and delivered therefrom?

3. Who knows the utmost tendencies of sin? I mean, what the least
sin driveth at, and what it would unavoidably run the sinner into.
There is not a plague, a judgment, an affliction, an evil under
heaven, that the least of our transgressions has not called for
at the hands of the great God! nay, the least sin calleth for all
the distresses that are under heaven, to fall upon the soul and
body of the sinner at once. This is plain, for that the least sin
deserveth hell; which is worse than all the plagues that are on
earth. But I say, who understandeth this? And I say again, if one
sin, the least sin deserveth all these things, what thinkest thou
do all thy sins deserve? how many judgments! how many plagues!
how many lashes with God's iron whip dost thou deserve? besides
there is hell itself, the place itself, the fire itself, the nature
of the torments, and the durableness of them, who can understand?

But this is not all, the tendencies of thy sins are to kill others.
Men, good men little think how many of their neighbours one of their
sins may kill. As, how many good men and good women do unawares,
through their uncircumspectness, drive their own children down into
the deep? (Psa 106:6,7) We will easily count them very hardhearted
sinners, that used to offer their children in sacrifice to devils;
when 'tis easy to do worse ourselves: they did but kill the body,
but we body and soul in hell, if we have not a care.

Do we know how our sins provoke God? how they grieve the Holy Ghost?
how they weaken our graces? how they spoil our prayers? how they
weaken faith? how they tempt Christ to be ashamed of us? and how
they hold back good from us? And if we know not every one of all
these things to the full, how shall we know to the full the love
of Christ which saveth us from them all?

4. Again, But who has the perfect knowledge of all these things?
I will grant that some good souls may have waded a great way in
some one, or more of them; but I know that there is not any that
thoroughly know them all. And yet the love of Christ doth save
us from all, notwithstanding all the vileness and soul-damning
virtue12 that is in them. Alas! how short are we of the knowledge
of ourselves, and of what is in us. How many are there that do
not know that man consisteth of a body made of dust, and of an
immortal soul? Yea, and how many be there of those that confess
it, that know not the constitution of either. I will add, how
many are there that profess themselves to be students of those
two parts of man, that have oftentimes proved themselves to be
but fools as to both? and I will conclude that there is not a man
under heaven that knoweth it all together: For man is "fearfully
and wonderfully made" (Psa 139:14): nor can the manner of the
union of these two parts be perfectly found out. How much more
then must we needs be at loss as to the fullness of the knowledge
of the love of Christ? But,

Reason Third, He that altogether knoweth the love of Christ, must,
precedent to that, know not only all the wiles of the devil; but
also all the plottings, contrivings and designs and attempts of
that wicked one; yea, he must know, all the times that he hath been
with God, together with all the motions that he has made that he
might have leave to fall upon us, as upon Job and Peter, to try
if he might swallow us up (Job 1 and 2, Luke 22:31). But who knows
all this? no man, no angel. For, if the heart of man be so deep,
that none, by all his actions, save God, can tell the utmost
secrets that are therein; how should the heart of angels, which
in all likelihood are deeper, be found out by any mortal man.
And yet this must be found out before we can find out the utmost
of the love of Christ to us. I conclude therefore from all these
things, that the love of Christ passeth knowledge: or that by no
means, the bottom, the utmost bounds thereof can be understood.

Reason Fourth, He that will presume to say, this love of Christ can
be to the utmost known by us, must presume to say that he knoweth
the utmost of the merits of his blood, the utmost exercise of his
patience, the utmost of his intercession, the utmost of the glory
that he has prepared and taken possession of for us. But I presume
that there is none that can know all this, therefore I may without
any fear assert, there is none that knows, that is, that knows to
the full, the other.

We come now more particularly to speak of the knowledge of the
love of Christ; we have spoken of the love of Christ; and of the
exceeding greatness of it: and now we come,

THIRD, To speak of the knowledge of it; that is to say, we will
shew

WHAT KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST'S LOVE IS ATTAINABLE IN THIS WORLD,

under these three heads. As to this, First, It may be known as to
the nature of it. Second, It may be known in many of the degrees
of it. Third, But the greatest knowledge that we can have of it
here, is to know that it passes knowledge.

First, We may know it in the nature of it. That is, that it is
love free, divine, heavenly, everlasting, incorruptible. And this
no love is but the love of Christ; all other love is either love
corruptible, transient, mixed, or earthly. It is divine, for 'tis
the love of the holy nature of God. It is heavenly, for that it
is from above: it is everlasting, for that it has no end: it is
immortal, for that there is not the appearance of corruptibleness
in it, or likelihood of decay.

This is general knowledge, and this is common among the saints,
at leastwise in the notion of it. Though I confess, it is hard in
time of temptation, practically to hold fast the soul to all these
things. But, as I have said already, this love of Christ must be
such, because love in the root of it, is essential to his nature,
as also I have proved now, as is the root, such are the branches;
and as is the spring, such are the streams, unless the channels
in which those streams do run, should be corrupted, and so defile
it; but I know no channels through which this love of Christ is
conveyed unto us, but those made in his side, his hands, and his
feet, &c. Or those gracious promises that dropped like honey from
his holy lips, in the day of his love, in which he spake them:
and seeing his love is conveyed to us, as through those channels,
and so by the conduit of the holy and blessed spirit of God, to
our hearts, it cannot be that it should hitherto be corrupted. I
know the cisterns, to wit, our hearts, into which it is conveyed,
are unclean, and may take away much, through the damp that they
may put upon it, of the native savour and sweetness thereof. I
know also, that there are those that tread down, and muddy those
streams with their feet (Eze 34:18,19); but yet neither the love
nor the channels in which it runs, should bear the blame of this.
And I hope those that are saints indeed, will not only be preserved
to eternal life, but nourished with this that is incorruptible
unto the day of Christ. I told you before, that in the hour of
temptation, it will be hard for the soul to hold fast to these
things; that is, to the true definition of this love; for then,
or at such seasons, it will not be admitted that the love of
Christ is either transient, or mixed; but we count that we cannot
be loved long, unless something better than yet we see in us, be
found there, as an inducement to Christ to love, and to continue
to love our poor souls (Isa 64:6). But these the Christian at length
gets over; for he sees, by experience, he hath no such inducement
(Deu 9:5); also, that Christ loves freely, and not for, or because
of such poor, silly, imaginary enticements (Eze 16:60-62). Thus
therefore the love of Christ may be known, that is, in the nature
of it: it may, I say, but not easily (Eze 36:25-33). For this
knowledge is neither easily got, though got, nor easily retained,
though retained. There is nothing that Satan setteth himself more
against, than the breaking forth of the love of Christ in its
own proper native lustre. For he knows it destroys his kingdom,
which standeth in profaneness, in errors and delusions, the only
destruction of which is the knowledge of this love of Christ (2 Cor
5:14). What mean those swarms of opinions that are in the world?
what is the reason that some are carried about as clouds, with a
tempest? what mean men's waverings, men's changing, and interchanging
truth for error, and one error for another? why, this is the thing,
the devil is in it. This work is his, and he makes this ado, to
make a dust; and a dust to darken the light of the gospel withal.
And if he once attaineth to that, then farewell the true knowledge
of the love of Christ.

Also he will assault the spirits of Christians with divers and sundry
cogitations, such as shall have in them a tendency to darken the
judgment, delude the fancy, to abuse the conscience. He has an art
to metamorphose all things. He can make God seem to be to us, a
most fierce and terrible destroyer; and Christ a terrible exactor
of obedience, and most amazingly pinching of his love. He can
make supposed sins unpardonable; and unpardonable ones, appear as
virtues. He can make the law to be received for gospel, and cause
that the gospel shall be thrown away as a fable. He can persuade,
that faith is fancy, and that fancy is the best faith in the world.
Besides, he can tickle the heart with false hope of a better life
hereafter, even as if the love of Christ were there. But, as I
said before, from all these things the true love of Christ in the
right knowledge of it, delivereth those that have it shed abroad
in the heart by the Holy Ghost that he hath given (Rom 5). Wherefore
it is for this purpose that Christ biddeth us to continue in his
love (John 15:9); because the right knowledge, and faith of that
to the soul, disperseth and driveth away all such fogs, and mists
of darkness; and makes the soul to sit fast in the promise of
eternal life by him; yea, and to grow up into him who is the head,
"in all things."

Before I leave this head, I will present my reader with these
things, as helps to the knowledge of the love of Christ. I mean
the knowledge of the nature of it, and as HELPS to retain it.

Help First, Know thy self, what a vile, horrible, abominable sinner
thou art: For thou canst not know the love of Christ, before thou
knowest the badness of thy nature. "O wretched man that I am" (Rom
7:24), must be, before a man can perceive the nature of the love
of Christ. He that sees himself but little, will hardly know much
of the love of Christ: he that sees of himself nothing at all,
will hardly ever see anything of the love of Christ. But he that
sees most of what an abominable wretch he is, he is like to see
most of what is the love of Christ. All errors in doctrine take
their rise from the want of this (I mean errors in doctrine as
to justification). All the idolizing of men's virtues, and human
inventions, riseth also from the want of this. So then if a man
would be kept sure and stedfast, let him labour before all things
to know his own wretchedness. People naturally think that the
knowledge of their sins is the way to destroy them; when in very
deed, it is the first step to salvation. Now if thou wouldest
know the badness of thy self, begin in the first place to study
the law, then thy heart, and so thy life. The law thou must look
into, for that's the glass; thy heart thou must look upon, for
that's the face; thy life thou must look upon, for that's the
body of a man, as to religion (James 1:25). And without the wary
consideration of these three, 'tis not to be thought that a man
can come at the knowledge of himself, and consequently to the
knowledge of the love of Christ (James 1:26,27).

Help Second, Labour to see the emptiness, shortness, and the
pollution that cleaveth to a man's own righteousness. This also
must in some measure be known, before a man can know the nature
of the love of Christ. They that see nothing of the loathsomeness
of man's best things, will think, that the love of Christ is of
that nature as to be procured, or won, obtained or purchased by
man's good deeds. And although so much gospel light is broke forth
as to stop men's mouths from saying this, yet 'tis nothing else
but sound conviction of the vileness of man's righteousness, that
will enable men to see that the love of Christ is of that nature,
as to save a man without it; as to see that it is of that nature
as to justify him without it: I say, without it, or not at all. There
is shortness, there is hypocrisy, there is a desire of vain glory,
there is pride, there is presumption in man's own righteousness:
nor can it be without these wickednesses, when men know not the
nature of the love of Christ. Now these defile it, and make it
abominable. Yea, if there were no imperfection in it, but that
which I first did mention, to wit, shortness; how could it cover
the nakedness of him that hath it, or obtain for the man, in whole
or in part, that Christ should love, and have respect unto him.

Occasions many thou hast given thee to see the emptiness of man's
own righteousness, but all will not do unless thou hast help from
heaven: wherefore thy wisdom will be, if thou canst tell where
to find it, to lie in the way of God, that when he comes to visit
the men that wait upon him in the means of his own appointing,
thou mayest be there; if perhaps he may cast an eye of pity upon
thy desolate soul, and make thee see the things above mentioned.
That thou mayest know the nature of the love of Christ.

Help Third, If thou wouldest know the nature of this love, be much
in acquainting of thy soul with the nature of the law, and the
nature of the gospel (Gal 3:21). The which though they are not
diametrically opposite one to another, yet do propound things so
differently to man, that if he knows not where, when, and how to
take them, 'tis impossible but that he should confound them, and
in confounding of them, lose his own soul (Rom 9:31,32). The law
is a servant, both first and last, to the gospel (Rom 10:3,4): when
therefore it is made a Lord, it destroyeth: and then to be sure
it is made a Lord and Saviour of, when its dictates and commands
are depended upon for life.

Thy wisdom therefore will be to study these things distinctly, and
thoroughly; for so far as thou art ignorant of the true knowledge
of the nature of these, so far thou art ignorant of the true
knowledge of the nature of the love of Christ. Read Paul to the
Galatians, that epistle was indicted by the Holy Ghost, on purpose
to direct the soul, in, and about this very thing.

Help Fourth, The right knowledge of the nature of the love of Christ,
is obtained, and retained, by keeping of these two doctrines at an
everlasting distance as to the conscience; to wit, not suffering
the law to rule but over my outward man, not suffering the gospel
to be removed one hair's breadth from my conscience. When Christ
dwells in my heart by faith (Eph 3:17), and the moral law dwells
in my members (Col 3:5), the one to keep up peace with God, the
other to keep my conversation in a good decorum: then am I right,
and not till then.

But this will not be done without much experience, diligence, and
delight in Christ. For there is nothing that Satan more desireth,
than that the law may abide in the conscience of an awakened
Christian, and there take up the place of Christ, and faith; for
he knows if this may be obtained, the vail is presently drawn over
the face of the soul, and the heart darkened as to the knowledge
of Christ; and being darkened, the man is driven into despair of
mercy, or is put upon it to work for life (2 Cor 3:13-15). There
is therefore, as I say, much diligence required of him that will
keep these two in their places assigned them of God. I say much
diligent study of the word, diligent prayer; with diligence to
walk with God in the world. But we will pass this, and come to
the second head.

Secondly, As the love of Christ may be known in the nature of it,
so it may be known in many degrees of it. That which is knowable,
admits of degrees of knowledge: the love of Christ is knowable.
Again, that which is not possible to be known to the utmost, is
to be known, we know not how much; and therefore they that seek
to know it, should never be contented or satisfied to what degree
of the knowledge of it soever they attain; but still should be
reaching forward, because there is more to be known of it before
them. "Brethren," said Paul, "I count not myself to have apprehended,
(that is to the utmost) but this one thing I do, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, I press towards the mark for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus" (Phil 3:13,14). I might here
discourse of many things, since I am upon this head of reaching
after the knowledge of the love of Christ in many of the degrees
of it. But I shall content myself with few.

1. He that would know the love of Christ in several degrees of
it, must begin at his person, for in him dwells all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge. Nay, more; In him "are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge" (Col 2:3). In him, that is, in
his person: For, for the godhead of Christ, and our nature to be
united in one person, is the highest mystery, and the first
appearance of the love of Christ by himself, to the world (1 Tim
3:16). Here I say, lie hid the treasures of wisdom, and here, to
the world, springs forth the riches of his love (John 1:14). That
the eternal word, for the salvation of sinners, should come down
from heaven and be made flesh, is an act of such condescension, a
discovery of such love, that can never to the full be found out.
Only here we may see, love in him was deep, was broad, was long,
and high: let us therefore first begin here to learn to know the
love of Christ, in the high degrees thereof.

(1.) Here, in the first place, we perceive love, in that the human
nature, the nature of man, not of angels, is taken into union with
God. Who so could consider this, as it is possible for it to be
considered, would stand amazed till he died with wonder. By this
very act of the heavenly wisdom, we have an inconceivable pledge
of the love of Christ to man: for in that he hath taken into
union with himself our nature, what doth it signify, but that he
intendeth to take into union with himself our person. For, for this
very purpose did he assume our nature. Wherefore we read that in
the flesh he took upon him, in that flesh, he died for us, the
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God (1 Peter 3:18).

(2.) As he was made flesh, so as was said afore, he became a public
or common person for us: and hereby is perceived another degree
of his love; undertaking to do for his, what was not possible they
should do for themselves, perfecting of righteousness to the very
end of the law, and doing for us, to the reconciling of us unto
his Father, and himself (Rom 10:3,4, 3:24).

(3.) Herein also we may attain to another degree of knowledge of
his love, by understanding that he has conquered, and so disabled
our foes, that they cannot now accomplish their designed enmity
upon us (Rom 5, Eph 5:26,27): but that when Satan, death, the grave
and sin have done to his people, whatever can by them be done, we
shall be still more than conquerors, (though on our side be many
disadvantages), through him that has loved us, over them (Rom
8:37).

(4.) By this also we may yet see more of his love, in that as a
forerunner, he is gone into heaven to take possession thereof for
us (Heb 6:20): there to make ready, and to prepare for us our
summer-houses, our mansion, dwelling-places. As if we were the
lords, and he the servant! (John 14:2,3) Oh this love!

(5.) Also we may see another degree of his love, in this, that
now in his absence, he has sent the third person in the Trinity to
supply his place as another comforter of us (John 16:7, 15:26),
that we may not think he has forgot us, not be left destitute of
a revealer of truth unto us (John 14:16). Yea, he has sent him to
fortify our spirits, and to strengthen us under all adversity; and
against our enemies of what account, or degree soever (Luke 21:15).

(6.) In this also we may see yet more of the love of Christ, in
that though he is in heaven and we on earth: Nothing can happen
to his people to hurt them, but he feels it, is touched with it,
and counteth it as done unto himself: Yea, sympathizes with them,
and is afflicted, and grieved in their griefs, and their afflictions.

(7.) Another thing by which also yet more of the love of Christ
is made manifest, and so may by us be known, is this: He is now,
and has been ever since his ascension into glory, laying out himself
as high-priest for us (Heb 7:24-26), that by the improving13 of
his merits before the throne of grace, in way of intercession, he
might preserve us from the ruins that our daily infirmities would
bring upon us (Heb 8:12): yea, and make our persons and performances
acceptable in his Father's sight (Rom 5:10, 1 Peter 2:5).

(8.) We also see yet more of his love by this, that he will have
us where himself is, that we may behold and be partakers of his
glory (John 17:24). And in this degree of his love, there are many
loves.

Then he will come for us, as a bridegroom for his bride (Matt
25:6-10). Then shall a public marriage be solemnized, and eternized
betwixt him and his church (Rev 19:6,7). Then she shall be wrapped
up in his mantles and robes of glory (Col 3:4). Then they shall be
separated, and separated from other sinners, and all things that
offend shall be taken away from among them (Matt 25:31, 13:41).
Then shall they be exalted to thrones, and power of judgment;
and shall also sit in judgment on sinful men and fallen angels,
acquiescing, by virtue of authority, with their king and head,
upon them (1 Cor 6:2,3). Then or from thenceforth for ever, there
shall be no more death, sorrow, hidings of his face, or eclipsing
of their glory for ever (Luke 20:36). And thus you may see what
rounds this our Jacob's ladder hath, and how by them we may climb,
and climb, even until we are climbed up to heaven: but now we are
set again; for all the glories, all the benefits, all the blessings,
and all the good things that are laid up in heaven for these; Who
can understand?

2. A second thing whereby the love of Christ is some degrees of
it may be known, is this: That he should pass by angels and take
hold of us. Who so considereth the nature of spirits, as they are
God's workmanship, must needs confess, that as such, they have a
pre-eminency above that which is made of dust: This then was the
disparity 'twixt us and them; they being, by birth, far more noble
than we. But now, when both are fallen, and by our fall, both in
a state of condemnation, that Jesus Christ should choose to take
up us, the most inconsiderable, and pass by them, to their eternal
perdition and destruction: O love! love in a high degree to man:
For verily he took not hold of angels, but of the seed of Abraham
he took hold (Heb 2:16). Yet this is not all: In all probability
this Lord Jesus has ten times as much to do now he has undertaken
to be our Saviour, as he would have had, had he stepped over us
and taken hold on them.

(1.) He needed not to have stooped so low as to take flesh upon
him; theirs being a more noble nature.

(2.) Nor would he in all likelihood, have met with those contempts,
those scorns, those reproaches and undervaluings from them, as he
has all-along received in this his undertaking, and met with from
sinful flesh. For they were more noble than we, and would sooner
have perceived the design of grace, and so one would think more
readily have fallen in therewith, than [creatures in] such darkness
as we were, and still by sin are.

(3.) They would not have had those disadvantages as we, for that
they would not have had a tempter, a destroyer, so strong and
mighty as ours is. Alas! had God left us, and taken them, though
we should have been ever so full of envy against their salvation;
yet being but flesh, what could we have done to them to have laid
obstacles in the way of their faith and hope, as they can and do
in ours?

(4.) They, it may fairly be presumed, had they been taken, and we
left, and made partakers in our sted, while we had been shut out,
as they are, would not have put Christ so to it, now in heaven
(pray bear with the expression, because I want a better) as we by
our imperfections have done and do. Sin, methinks, would not have
so hanged in their natures as it doth in ours: their reason, and
sense, and apprehensions being more quick, and so more apt to have
been taken with this love of Christ, and by it more easily have
been sanctified.

(5.) The law which they have broken, being not so intricate, as
that against which we have offended, theirs being a commandment
with faithfulness to abide in the place in which their Creator had
set them; methinks, considering also the aptness of their natures
as angels, would not have made their complete obedience so difficult.

(6.) Nor can I imagine, but had they been taken, they, as creatures
excelling in strength, would have been more capable of rendering
these praises and blessings to God for eternal mercies, than such
poor sorry creatures as we are, could. But! "behold what manner
of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the children of God" (1 John 3:1). That we, not they, that we
notwithstanding all that they have, or could have done to hinder
it, should be called the children of God.

This therefore is an high degree of the love of Jesus Christ to
us, that when we and they were fallen, he should stoop and take up
us, the more ignoble, and leave so mighty a creature in his sins
to perish.

3. A third thing whereby the love of Christ in some of the degrees
of it may be known, will be to consider more particularly the
way, and unwearied work that he hath with man to bring him to that
kingdom, that by his blood he hath obtained for him.

(1.) Man, when the Lord Jesus takes him in hand to make him partaker
of the benefit, is found an enemy to his redeemer; nor doth all
the intelligence that he has had of the grace and love of Christ
to such, mollify him at all, to wit, before the day of God's power
comes (Rom 4:5, 5:7-10). And this is a strange thing. Had man,
though he could not have come to Christ, been willing that Christ
should have come to him, it had been something; it would have shewn
that he had taken his grace to heart, and considered of it: yea,
and that he was willing to be a sharer in it. But verily here is
no such thing; man, though he has free will, yet is willing by no
means to be saved God's way, to wit, by Jesus Christ, before (as
was said before) the day of God's power comes upon him. When the
good shepherd went to look for his sheep that was lost in the
wilderness, and had found it: did it go one step homewards upon
its own legs? did not the shepherd take her and lay her upon his
shoulder, and bring her home rejoicing (Luke 15). This then is
not love only, but love to a degree.

(2.) When man is taken, and laid under the day of God's power:
When Christ is opening his ear to discipline, and speaking to him
that his heart may receive instruction; many times that poor man
is, as if the devil had found him, and not God. How frenzily he
imagines? how crossly he thinks? How ungainly he carries it under
convictions, counsels, and his present apprehension of things?
I know some are more powerfully dealt withal, and more strongly
bound at first by the world; but others more in an ordinary manner,
that the flesh, and reason may be seen, to the glory of Christ.
Yea, and where the will is made more quickly to comply with its
salvation, 'tis no thanks to the sinner at all (Job 4:18). 'Tis
the day of the power of the Lord that has made the work so soon
to appear. Therefore count this an act of love, in the height of
love; Love in a great degree (John 15:16).

(3.) When Christ Jesus has made this mad man to come to himself,
and persuaded him to be willing to accept of his salvation: yet
he may not be trusted, nor left alone, for then the corruptions
that still lie scattering up and down in his flesh will tempt him
to it, and he will be gone; yea, so desperately wicked is the flesh
of saints, that should they be left to themselves but a little
while, none knows what horrible transgressions would break out.
Proof of this we have to amazement, plentifully scattered here
and there in the word. Hence we have the patience of God, and
his gentleness so admired (2 Chron 32:21): for through that it is
that they are preserved. He that keepeth Israel neither slumbers
nor sleeps (Psa 121:4), but watches for them, and over them every
moment, for he knows else they will be hurt (Isa 27:3).

(4.) Yea, notwithstanding this, how often are saints found playing
truant, and lurking like thieves in one hole or other. Now, in
the guilt of backsliding by the power of this, and then in filth
by the power of that corruption (Jer 2:26). Yea, and when found in
such decayings, and under such revoltings from God, how commonly
do they hide their sin with Adam, and David, even until their
Saviour fireth out of their mouths a confession of the truth of
their naughtiness. "When I keep silence," said David, (and yet he
chose to keep silence after he had committed his wickedness) "my
bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long. For day and
night thy hand was heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into the
drought of summer" (Psa 32:3,4). but why didst thou not confess
what thou hadst done then? So I did, saith he, at last, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin (verse 5).

(5.) When the sins of saints are so visible and apparent to others,
that God for the vindication of his name and honour must punish
them in the sight of others; yea, must do it, as he is just: Yet
then for Christ's sake, he waveth such judgments, and refuseth to
inflict such punishments as naturally tend to their destruction,
and chooseth to chastise them with such rods and scourges, as may
do them good in the end; and that they may not be condemned with
the world (1 Cor 11:31,32). Wherefore the Lord loves them, and
they are blessed, whom he chasteneth and teacheth out of his law
(Heb 12:5-8, Psa 94:12). And these things are love to a degree.

(6.) That Christ should supply out of his fullness the beginnings
of grace in our souls, and carry on that work of so great concern,
and that which at times we have so little esteem of, is none of
the least of the aggravations of the love of Christ to his people.
And this work is as common as any of the works of Christ, and
as necessary to our salvation, as is his righteousness, and the
imputation thereof to our justification: For else how could we
hold out to the end (Matt 24:13); and yet none else can be saved.

(7.) And that the love of Christ should be such to us that he
will thus act, thus do to, and for us, with gladness; (as afore
is manifest by the parable of the lost sheep) is another degree
of his love towards us: And such an one too, as is none of the
lowest rate. I have seen hot love, soon cold; and love that has
continued to act, yet act towards the end, as the man that by
running, and has run himself off his legs, pants, and can hardly
run any longer: but I never saw love like the love of Christ, who
as a giant, and bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and as a
strong man, rejoiceth to run his race (Psa 19:5). Loving higher
and higher, stronger and stronger, I mean as to the lettings out
of love, for he reserveth the best wine even till the last (John
2:10).

(8.) I will conclude with this, that his love may be known in many
degrees of it, by that sort of sinners whose salvation he most
rejoiceth in, and that is, in the salvation of the sinners that are
of the biggest size: Great sinners, Jerusalem sinners, Samaritan
sinners, publican sinners. I might urge moreover, how he hath
proportioned invitations, promises and examples of his love, for
the encouragement and support of those whose souls would trust in
him: By which also great degrees of his love may be understood.
But we will come now to the third thing that was propounded.

Thirdly, But the greatest attainment that as to the understanding
of the love of Christ, we can arrive to here, is to know that
it passes knowledge: And to know the love of Christ that passeth
knowledge. This truth discovereth itself,

1. By the text itself, for the Apostle here, in this prayer of his
for the Ephesians, doth not only desire that they may know, but
describeth that thing which he prays they may know, by this term,
It passeth knowledge. And to know the love of Christ which passeth
knowledge. As our reason and carnal imagination will be rudely,
and unduly tampering with any thing of Christ, so more especially
with the love and kindness of Christ: Judging and concluding that
just such it is, and none other, as may be apprehended by them:
Yea, and will have a belief that just so, and no otherwise are
the dimensions of this love; nor can it save beyond our carnal
conceptions of it. Saying to the soul as Pharaoh once did to Israel
in another case: "Let the Lord be with you as I shall" (judge it
meet he should) "let you go." We think Christ loves us no more
than we do think he can, and so conclude that his love is such as
may by us be comprehended, or known to the utmost bounds thereof.
But these are false conceptions, and this love of Christ that
we think is such, is indeed none of the love of Christ, but a
false image thereof, set before our eyes. I speak not now of weak
knowledge, but of foolish and bold conclusions. A man through
unbelief may think that Christ has no love for him, and yet Christ
may love him with a love that passeth knowledge. But when men in
the common course of their profession, will be always terminating
here, that they know how, and how far Christ can love, and
will thence be bold to conclude of their own safety, and of the
loss and ruin of all that are not in the same notions, opinions,
formalities, or judgments as they: this is the worst and greatest
of all. The text therefore, to rectify those false and erroneous
conclusions, says, It is a love that passeth knowledge.

And it will be worth our observation to take notice that men,
erroneous men, do not put these limits so commonly to the Father
and his love, as [to] the Son and his. Hence you have some that
boast that God can save some who have not the knowledge of the
person of the mediator Jesus Christ the righteous; as the heathens
that have, and still do make a great improvement of the law and
light of nature: crying out with disdain against the narrowness,
rigidness, censoriousness, and pride of those that think the
contrary. Being not ashamed all the while to eclipse, to degrade,
to lessen and undervalue the love of Jesus Christ; making of him
and his undertakings, to offer himself a sacrifice to appease the
justice of God for our sins, but a thing indifferent, and in its
own nature but as other smaller matters.

But all this while the devil knows full well at what game he plays,
for he knows that without Christ, without faith in his blood, there
is no remission of sins. Wherefore, saith he, let these men talk
what they will of the greatness of the love of God as creator, so
they sleight and undervalue the love of Christ as mediator. And
yet it is worth our consideration, that the greatness of the love
of God is most expressed in his giving of Christ to be a Saviour,
and in bestowing his benefits upon us that we may be happy through
him.

But to return, The love of Christ that is so indeed, is love that
passeth knowledge: and the best and highest of our knowledge of
it is, that we know it to be such.

2. Because I find that at this point, the great men of God, of old,
were wont to stop, be set, and beyond which they could not pass.
'Twas this that made Moses wonder (Deu 4:31-34). 'Twas this that
made David cry out, How great and wonderful are the works of God?
"thy thoughts to usward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto
thee: If I would declare and speak of them, they are more than
can be numbered" (Psa 40:5). And again, "How precious also are thy
thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them! If I should
count them, they are more in number than the sand" (Psa 139:17,18).
And a little before, "such knowledge is too wonderful for me"
(verse 6). Isaiah saith, there hath not entered into the heart of
man what God has prepared for them that wait for him (Isa 64:4).
Ezekiel says, this is the river that cannot be passed over (47:5):
And Micah to the sea, (7:19) and Zechariah to a fountain, hath
compared this unsearchable love (13:1). Wherefore the Apostle's
position, That the love of Christ is that which passeth knowledge,
is a truth not to be doubted of: Consequently, to know this, and
that it is such, is the farthest that we can go. This is to justify
God, who has said it, and to magnify the Son, who has loved us
with such a love: And the contrary is to dishonour him, to lessen
him, and to make him a deficient Saviour. For suppose this should
be true, that thou couldest to the utmost comprehend this love;
yet unless, by thy knowledge thou canst comprehend beyond all
evil of sin, or beyond what any man sins, who shall be saved, can
spread themselves or infect: Thou must leave some pardonable man
in an unpardonable condition. For that thou canst comprehend this
love, and yet canst not comprehend that sin. This makes Christ a
deficient Saviour. Besides, if thou comprehendest truly; the word
that says, it passeth knowledge, hast lost its sanctity, its truth.

It must therefore be, that this love passeth knowledge; and that
the highest pitch that a man by knowledge can attain unto, as to
this, is to know that it passeth knowledge. My reason is, for that
all degrees of love, be they never so high, or many, and high, yet,
if we can comprehend them, rest in the bowels of our knowledge,
for that only which is beyond us, is that which passeth knowledge.
That which we can reach, cannot be the highest: And if a man
thinks there is nothing beyond what he can reach, he has no more
knowledge as to that: but if he knows that together with what he
hath already reached, there is that which he cannot reach, before
[him]; then he has a knowledge for that also, even a knowledge, that
it passeth knowledge. 'Tis true a man that thus knoweth may have
divers conjectures about that thing that is beyond his knowledge. Yea,
in reason it will be so, because he knows that there is something
yet before him: But since the thing itself is truly beyond his
knowledge, none of his conjectures about that thing may be counted
knowledge. Or suppose a man that thus conjectureth, should hit
right as to what he now conjectures; his right hitting about that
thing may not be called knowledge: It is as yet to him but as an
uncertain guess, and is still beyond this knowledge.

Quest. But, may some say, what good will it do a man to know that
the love of Christ passeth knowledge? one would think that it should
do one more good to believe that the knowledge of the whole love
of Christ might be attainable.

Answer. That there is an advantage in knowing that the love of
Christ passeth knowledge; must not be questioned, for that the
Apostle saith it doth (2 Tim 3:16). For to know what the holy word
affirms, is profitable: nor would he pray that we might know that
which passeth knowledge, were there not by our knowing of it, some
help to be administered. But to shew you some of the advantages
that will come to us by knowing that the love of Christ passeth
knowledge.

(1.) By knowing of this a child of God has in reserve for himself,
at a day, when all that he otherwise knows, may be taken from him
through the power of temptation. Sometimes a good man may be so
put to it, that all that he knows comprehensively may be taken from
him: to wit, the knowledge of the truth of his faith, or that he
has the grace of God in him, or the like, that I say may be taken
from him. Now if at this time, he knows the love of Christ that
passeth knowledge, he knows a way in all probability to be recovered
again. For if Christ Jesus loves with a love that passeth knowledge:
then, saith the soul, that is thus in the dark, he may love me
yet, for ought I know, for I know that he loves with a love that
passeth knowledge; and therefore I will not utterly despond. Yea,
if Satan should attempt to question whether ever Christ Jesus will
look upon me or no: the answer is, if I know the love that passes
knowledge: But he may look upon me, (O, Satan) yea, and love,
and save me too, for ought I poor sinner know; for he loves with
a love that passeth knowledge. If I be fallen into sin that lies
hard upon me, and my conscience fears, that for this there is no
forgiveness. The help for a stay from utter despair is at hand:
but there may, say I, for Christ loves, with a love that passeth
knowledge. If Satan would dissuade me from praying to God,
by suggesting as if Christ would not regard the stammering, and
chattering prayer of mine. The answer is ready, but he may regard
for ought I know; for he loves with a love that passeth knowledge.
If the tempter doth suggest that thy trials, and troubles, and
afflictions, are so many, that it is to be thought thou shall
never get beyond them. The answer is near, but for ought we know,
Christ may carry me through them all, for he loves with a love
that passeth knowledge. Thus I say, is relief at hand, and a help
in reserve for the tempted, let their temptations be what they will.
This therefore is the weapon that will baffle the devil when all
other weapons fail; for ought I know, Christ may save me, for he
loves with a love that passeth knowledge. Yea, suppose he should
drive me to the worst of fears, and that is to doubt that I
neither have nor shall have for ever the grace of God in my soul.
The answer is at hand, but I have or may have it, for Christ
loves with a love that passeth knowledge. Thus therefore you may
see that in this prayer of Paul, there is a great deal of good.
He prays, when he prays that we might know the love of Christ that
passeth knowledge: that we may have a help at hand, and relief
against all the horrible temptations of the devil. For this is a
help at hand, a help that is ready to fall in with us, if there
be yet remaining with us, but the least grain of right reasoning
according to the nature of things. For if it be objected against
a man that he is poor, because he has but a groat in his pocket;
yet if he has an unknown deal of money in his trunks, how easy
is it for him to recover himself from that slander, by returning
the knowledge of what he has, upon the objector. This is the case,
and thus it is, and will be with them that know the love of Christ
that passeth knowledge. Wherefore,

(2.) By this knowledge, room is made for a Christian, and liberty
is ministered unto him, to turn himself every way in all spiritual
things. This is the Christian's rehoboth, that well for which the
Philistines have no heart to strive, and that which will cause
that we be fruitful in the land (Gen 26:22).

If Christians know not with this knowledge, they walk in the world
as if they were pinioned; or as if fetters were hanged on their
heels. But this enlarged their steps under them (2 Sam 22:37):
by the knowledge of this love they may walk at liberty, and their
steps shall not be straitened. This is that which Solomon intends
when he saith, "Get wisdom, and get understanding" (Prov 4:5).
Then "when thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened, and when
thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble" (Prov 4:12). A man that has
only from hand to mouth, is oft put to it to know how to use his
penny, and comes off also, many times, but with an hungry belly;
but he that has, not only that, but always over and to spare, he
is more at liberty, and can live in fullness, and far more like a
gentleman. There is a man has a cistern, and that is full of water:
there is another also, that has his cistern full, and withal, his
spring in his yard; but a great drought is upon the land in which
they dwell: I would now know, which of these two have the most
advantage to live in their own minds at liberty, without fear of
wanting water? Why this is the case in hand. There is a Christian
that knows Christ in all those degrees of his love that are
knowable, but he knoweth Christ nothing in his love that passeth
knowledge. There is another Christian, and he knows Christ, as the
first, but withal, he also knows him as to his love that passeth
knowledge. Pray now tell me, which of these two are likeliest to
live most like a Christian, that is, like a spiritual prince, and
like him that possesseth all things? which has most advantage to
live in godly largeness of heart, and is most at liberty in his
mind? which of these two have the greatest advantage to believe,
and the greatest engagements laid upon him to love the Lord Jesus?
which of these have also most in readiness to resist the wiles of
the devil, and to subdue the power and prevalency of corruptions?
'Tis this, that makes men fathers in Christianity. "I write unto
you, fathers, because ye have known;--I have written unto you,
fathers, because ye have known" (1 John 2:13-14), why, have not
others known, not so as the fathers? The fathers have known and
known. They have known the love of Christ in those degrees of love
which are knowable, and have also known the love of Christ to be
such which passeth knowledge. In my father's house is bread enough
and to spare, was that that fetched the prodigal home (Luke
15:17). And when Moses would speak an endless all to Israel, for
the comfort and stay of their souls, he calls their God, "The
fountain of Jacob upon a land of corn and wine" (Deu 33:28).

(3.) By this knowledge, or knowing of the love of Christ which
passeth knowledge, there is begot in Christians a greater desire to
press forwards to that which is before them (Phil 3:12-21). What
is the reason of all that sloth, carnal contentedness, and listlessness
of spirit in Christians, more than the ignorance of this. For he
that thinks he knows what can be known, is beyond all reason that
should induce him to seek yet after more. Now the love of Christ
may be said, not to be knowable, upon a threefold account: [namely].
For that my knowledge is weak. For that my knowledge is imperfect.
Or for that, though my knowledge be never so perfect, because the
love of Christ is eternal.

There is love that is not to be apprehended by weak knowledge.
Convince a man of this, and then, if the knowledge of what he
already has, be truly sweet to his soul (Prov 2:10), it will stir
him up with great heartiness to desire to know what more of this
is possible.

There is love beyond what he knows already, who is indued with the
most perfect knowledge, that man here may have. Now if what this
man knows already of this love is indeed sweet unto him; then it
puts him upon hearty desires that his soul may yet know more. And
because there is no bound set to man, how much he may know in this
life thereof; therefore his desires, notwithstanding what he has
attained, are yet kept alive, and in the pursuit after the knowledge
of more of the love of Christ. And God in old time has taken it
so well at the hands of some of his, that their desires have been
so great, that when, as I may say, they have known as much on earth
as is possible for them to know; (that is by ordinary means) he
has come down to them in visions and revelations; or else taken
them up to him for an hour or two into paradise, that they might
know, and then let them down again.

But this is not all, There is a knowledge of the love of Christ,
that we are by no means capable of until we be possessed of the
heavens. And I would know, if a man indeed loveth Christ, whether
the belief of this be not one of the highest arguments that can
be urged, to make such an one weary of this world, that he may be
with him. To such an one, "to live is Christ, and to die is gain"
(Phil 1:21-23). And to such an one, it is difficult to bring
his mind to be content to stay here a longer time; except he be
satisfied that Christ has still work for him here to do.

I will yet add, There is a love of Christ, I will not say, that
cannot be known, but I will say, that cannot be enjoyed; no, not
by them now in heaven (in soul) until the day of judgment. And the
knowledge of this, when it has possessed even men on earth, has
made them choose a day of judgment, before a day of death, that
they might know what is beyond that state and knowledge which
even the spirits of just men made perfect, now do enjoy in heaven
(2 Cor 5:4). Wherefore, as I said at first, To know the love of
Christ that passeth knowledge, is advantageous upon this account;
it begetteth in Christians a great desire to reach, and press
forward to that which is before.

One thing more, and then, as to this reason, I have done. Even that
love of Christ that is absolutely unknowable, as to the utmost
bound thereof because it is eternal, will be yet in the nature
of it sweet and desirable, because we shall enjoy or be possessed
of it so. This therefore, if there were no more, is enough, when
known, to draw away the heart from things that are below, to
itself.

(4.) The love that passeth knowledge. The knowledge of that is a
very fruitful knowledge. It cannot be, but it must be fruitful.
Some knowledge is empty, and alone, not attended with that good,
and with those blessings wherewith this knowledge is attended. Did
I say, it is fruitful? I will add, it is attended with the best
fruit; it yieldeth the best wine: It fills the soul with all the
fullness of God. "And to know the love of Christ which passeth
knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God."
God is in Christ, and makes himself known to us by the love of
Christ. "Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine
of Christ, hath not God," for God is not to be found nor enjoyed,
but in him, consequently, he that hath, and abideth in the doctrine
of Christ, "hath both the Father and the Son" (2 John 9). Now,
since there are degrees of knowledge of this doctrine, and since
the highest degree of the knowledge of him, is to know that he
has a Love that passeth knowledge, it follows, that if he that
has the least saving knowledge of this doctrine, hath God; he that
hath the largest knowledge of it, has God much more, or, according
to the text, is filled with all the fullness of God. What this
fullness of God should be, is best gathered from such sayings of
the Holy Ghost, as come nearest to this, in language, filled,

Full of goodness (Rom 15:14).

Full of faith (Acts 6:5).

Full of the Holy Ghost (Acts 7:55).

Full of assurance of faith (Heb 10:22).

Full of assurance of hope (Heb 6:11).

Full of joy unspeakable, and full of glory (1 Peter 1:8).

Full of joy (1 John 1:4).

Full of good works (Acts 11:36).

Being filled with the knowledge of his will (Col 1:9).

Being filled with the spirit (Eph 5:18).

Filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ
unto the glory and praise of God (Phil 4:11). These things to be
sure are included either for the cause or effect of this fullness.
The cause they cannot be, for that is God's, by his Holy Spirit.
The effects therefore they are, for wherever God dwells in the
degree intended in the text, there is shewn in an eminent manner,
by these things, "what is the riches of the glory of his inheritance
in the saints" (Eph 1:18). But these things dwell not in that
measure specified by the text, in any, but those who know the love
of Christ which passeth knowledge.

But what a man is he that is filled with all these things! or that
is, as we have it in the text, "filled with all the fullness of
God!" Such men are, at this day, wanting in the churches. These
are the men that sweeten churches, and that bring glory to God
and to religion. And knowledge will make us such, such knowledge
as the Apostle here speaketh of.14 I have now done, when I have
spoken something by way of USE unto you, from what hath been said.
And,

Use First, Is there such breadth, and length, and depth, and
height in God, for us? And is there toward us love in Christ that
passeth knowledge? Then this shews us, not only the greatness of
the majesty of the Father and the Son, but the great good will
that is in their heart to them that receive their word.

God has engaged the breadth, and length and depth, and height of
the love, the wisdom, the power, and truth that is in himself, for
us; and Christ has loved us with a love that passeth knowledge.
We may well say, "Who is like thee, O Lord, among the gods?" (Exo
15:11). Or, as another prophet has it, "Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression
of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for
ever: because he delighteth in mercy" (Micah 7:18). Yea, no words
can sufficiently set forth the greatness of this love of God and
his Son to us poor miserable sinners.

Use Second, Is there so great a heart for love, towards us, both
in the Father and in the Son? Then let us be much in the study
and search after the greatness of this love. This is the sweetest
study that a man can devote himself unto; because it is the study
of the love of God and of Christ to man. Studies that yield far
less profit than this, how close are they pursued, by some who
have adapted themselves thereunto? Men do not use to count telling
over of their money burdensome to them, nor yet the recounting of
their grounds, their herds, and their flocks, when they increase.
Why? the study of the unsearchable love of God in Christ to man,
is better in itself, and yields more sweetness to the soul of
man, than can ten thousand such things as but now are mentioned.
I know the wise men of this world, of whom there are many, will
say as to what I now press you unto; Who can shew us any good in
it? But Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that
their corn and their wine increaseth (Psa 4:6,7). David also said
that his meditation on the Lord should be sweet. Oh, there is in
God and in his Son, that kindness for the sons of men, that, did
they know it, they would like to retain the knowledge of it in
their hearts. They would cry out as she did of old; "Set me as a
seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm: For love is strong
as death" (Song 8:6,7). Every part, crumb, grain, or scrap of this
knowledge, is to a Christian, as drops of honey are to sweet-palated
children, worth the gathering up, worth the putting to the taste
to be relished. Yea, David says of the word which is the ground
of knowledge: "It is sweeter than honey or the honey-comb. More,"
saith he, "to be desired are they than gold; yea, than much fine
gold; sweeter also than honey or the honey-comb" (Psa 19:10). Why
then do not Christians devote themselves to the meditation of this
so heavenly, so goodly, so sweet, and so comfortable a thing, that
yieldeth such advantage to the soul? The reason is, these things
are talked of, but not believed: did men believe what they say,
when they speak so largely of the love of God, and the love of
Jesus Christ, they would, they could not but meditate upon it.
There are so many wonders in it, and men love to think of wonders.
There is so much profit in it, and men love to think of that
which yields them profit. But, as I said, the belief of things is
wanting. Belief of a thing will have strong effects, whether the
ground for it be true, or false. As suppose one of you should,
when you are at a neighbour's house, believe that your own house
is on fire, whilst your children are fast asleep in bed, though
indeed there were no such thing; I will appeal to any of you if
this belief would not make notable work with and upon your hearts.
Let a man believe he shall be damned, though afterwards it is
evident he believed a lie, yet what work did that belief make in
that man's heart; even so, and much more, the belief of heavenly
things will work, because true and great, and most good; also,
where they are indeed believed, their evidence is managed upon
their spirit, by the power and glory of the Holy Ghost itself:
Wherefore let us study these things.

Use Third, Let us cast ourselves upon this love. No greater
encouragement can be given us, than what is in the text and about
it. It is great, it is love that passeth knowledge. Men that are
sensible of danger, are glad when they hear of such helps upon
which they may boldly venture for escape. Why such an help and
relief, the text helpeth trembling and fearful consciences to.
Fear and trembling as to misery hereafter, can flow but from what
we know, feel, or imagine: but the text speaks of a love that
is beyond that we can know, feel, or imagine, even of a love
that passeth knowledge; consequently of a love that goes beyond
all these. Besides, the Apostle's conclusion upon this subject,
plainly makes it manifest that this meaning which I have put upon
the text, is the mind of the Holy Ghost. "Now unto him," saith
he, "that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask
or think, according to the power that worketh in us, unto him be
glory in the church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world
without end. Amen" (Eph 3:20,21). What can be more plain? what
can be more full? What can be more suitable to the most desponding
spirit in any man? He can do more than thou knowest he will. He
can do more than thou thinkest he can. What dost thou think? why,
I think, saith the sinner, that I am cast away. Well, but there
are worse thoughts than these, therefore think again. Why, saith
the sinner, I think that my sins are as many as the sins of all
the world. Indeed this is a very black thought, but there are worse
thoughts than this, therefore prithee think again. Why, I think,
saith the sinner, that God is not able to pardon all my sins. Ay,
now thou hast thought indeed. For this thought makes thee look
more like a devil than a man, and yet because thou art a man and
not a devil, see the condescension and the boundlessness of the
love of thy God. He is able to do above all that we think! Couldest
thou (sinner) if thou hadst been allowed, thyself express what thou
wouldest have expressed, the greatness of the love thou wantest,
with words that could have suited thee better? for 'tis not said
he can do above what we think, meaning our thinking at present,
but above all we can think, meaning above the worst and most
soul-dejecting thoughts that we have at any time. Sometimes the
dejected have worse thoughts than at other times they have. Well,
take them at their worst times, at times when they think, and
think, till they think themselves down into the very pangs of hell;
yet this word of the grace of God, is above them, and shews that
he can yet recover and save these miserable people. And now I am
upon this subject, I will a little further walk and travel with
the desponding ones, and will put a few words in their mouths for
their help against temptations that may come upon them hereafter.
For as Satan follows such now, with charges and applications of
guilt, so he may follow them with interrogatories and appeals:
for he can tell how by appeals, as well as by charging of sin,
to sink and drown the sinner whose soul he has leave to engage.
Suppose therefore that some distressed man or woman, should after
this way be engaged, and Satan should with his interrogatories,
and appeals be busy with them to drive them to desperation; the
text last mentioned, to say nothing of the subject of our discourse,
yields plenty of help for the relief of such an one. Says Satan,
dost thou not know that thou hast horribly sinned? yes, says the
soul, I do. Says Satan, dost thou not know, that thou art one of
the vilest in all the pack of professors? yes, says the soul, I
do. Says Satan, doth not thy conscience tell thee that thou art
and hast been more base than any of thy fellows can imagine thee
to be? Yes, says the soul; my conscience tells me so. Well, saith
Satan, now will I come upon thee with my appeals. Art thou not a
graceless wretch? Yes. Hast thou an heart to be sorry for this
wickedness? No, not as I should. And albeit, saith Satan, thou prayest
sometimes, yet is not thy heart possessed with a belief that God
will not regard thee? yes, says the sinner. Why then despair, and
go hang thyself, saith the devil. And now we are at the end of
the thing designed and driven at by Satan. But what shall I now
do, saith the sinner; I answer, take up the words of the text
against him, Christ loves with a love that passeth knowledge, and
answereth him farther, saying Satan, though I cannot think that
God loves me; though I cannot think that God will save me; yet I
will not yield to thee: for God can do more than I think he can.
And whereas thou appealest unto me, if whether when I pray, my
heart is not possessed with unbelief that God will not regard me;
that shall not sink me neither: for God can do abundantly above
what I ask or think. Thus this text helpeth, where obstructions
are put in against our believing, and thereby casting ourselves
upon the love of God in Christ for salvation.

And yet this is not all, for the text is yet more full: "He is
able to do abundantly more," yea, "exceeding abundantly more," or
"above all that we ask or think." It is a text made up of words
picked and packed together by the wisdom of God, picked and packed
together on purpose for the succour and relief of the tempted, that
they may when in the midst of their distresses, cast themselves
upon the Lord their God. He can do abundantly more than we ask.
Oh! says the soul, that he would but do so much for me as I could
ask him to do! How happy a man should I then be. Why, what wouldest
thou ask for, sinner? you may be sure, says the soul, I would ask
to be saved from my sins; I would ask for faith in, and love to,
Christ; I would ask to be preserved in this evil world, and ask
to be glorified with Christ in heaven. He that asketh of all this,
doth indeed ask for much, and for more than Satan would have him
believe that God is able or willing to bestow upon him; but mark,
the text doth not say, that God is able to do all that we can ask
or think, but that he is able to do above all, yea, abundantly
above all, yea, exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think. What a text is this! What a God have we! God foresaw the
sins of his people, and what work the devil would make with their
hearts about them, and therefore to prevent their ruin by his
temptation, he has thus largely, as you see, expressed his love by
his word. Let us therefore, as has been bidden us, make this good
use of this doctrine of grace, as to cast ourselves upon this love
of God in the times of distress and temptation.

Use Fourth, Take heed of abusing this love. This exhortation seems
needless; for love is such a thing, that one would think none could
find in their heart to abuse. But for all that, I am of opinion,
that there is nothing that is more abused among professors this
day, than is this love of God. There has of late more light about
the love of Christ broke out, than formerly: every boy now can talk
of the love of Christ; but this love of Christ has not been rightly
applied by preachers, or else not rightly received by professors.
For never was this grace of Christ so turned into lasciviousness,
as now. Now it is a practice among professors to learn to be vile,
of the profane. Yea, and to plead for that vileness: Nay, we will
turn it the other way, now it is so that the profane do learn to
be vile of those that profess (They teach the wicked ones their
ways): a thing that no good man should think on but with blushing
cheeks (Jer 2:33).15 Jude speaketh of these people, and tells us
that they, notwithstanding their profession, deny the only Lord
God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ (verse 4). "They profess," saith
Paul, "that they know God; but in works they deny him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate"
(Titus 1:16).

But I say, let not this love of God and of Christ, be abused. 'Tis
unnatural to abuse love, to abuse love is a villany condemned of
all, yea, to abuse love, is the most inexcusable sin of all. It is
next the sin of devils to abuse love, the love of God and of Christ.

And what says the Apostle? "Because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved, therefore God shall send
them strong delusion that they should believe a lie, that they all
might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness" (2 Thess 2:10-12). And what can such an one say
for himself in the judgment, that shall be charged with the abuse
of love? Christians, deny yourselves, deny your lusts, deny the
vanities of this present life, devote yourselves to God; become
lovers of God, lovers of his ways, and "a people zealous of good
works"; then shall you show one to another, and to all men, that you
have not received the grace of God in vain (2 Cor 6:1). Renounce
therefore the hidden things of dishonesty, walk not in craftiness,
nor handle God's word deceitfully, but by manifestation of the
truth, commend yourselves to every man's conscience in the sight
of God. Do this, I say, yea, and so endeavour such a closure with
this love of God in Christ, as may graciously constrain you to do
it, because, when all proofs of the right receiving of this love
of Christ shall be produced, none will be found of worth enough
to justify the simplicity of our profession, but that which makes
us "zealous of good works" (Titus 2:14). And what a thing will it
be to be turned off at last, as one that abused the love of Christ!
as one that presumed upon his lusts, this world, and all manner
of naughtiness, because the love of Christ to pardon sins was so
great! What an unthinking, what a disingenuous one wilt thou be
counted at that day! yea, thou wilt be found to be the man that
made a prey of love, that made a stalking-horse of love, that made
of love a slave to sin, the devil and the world, and will not that
be bad? (Read Eze 16)

Use Fifth, Is the love of God and of Christ so great? let us then
labour to improve it to the utmost for our advantage, against all
the hindrances of faith.

To what purpose else is it revealed, made mention of, and commended
to us? We are environed with many enemies, and faith in the love
of God and of Christ, is our only succour and shelter. Wherefore
our duty and wisdom and privilege is, to improve this love for
our own advantage. Improve it against daily infirmities, improve
it against the wiles of the devil; improve it against the threats,
rage, death, and destruction, that the men of this world continually
with their terror set before you. But how must that be done? why,
set this love and the safety that is in it, before thine eyes;
and behold it while these things make their assaults upon thee.
These words, the faith of this, God loves me, will support thee
in the midst of what dangers may assault thee. And this is that
which is meant, when we are exhorted to rejoice in the Lord (Phil
3:1), to make our boast in the Lord (Psa 44:8); to triumph in
Christ (2 Cor 2:14); and to set the Lord always before our face
(Psa 16:8). For he that can do this thing stedfastly, cannot
be overcome. For in God there is more than can be in the world,
either to help or hinder; wherefore if God be my helper, if God
loves me, if Christ be my redeemer, and has bestowed his love that
passeth knowledge upon me, who can be against me? (Heb 13:6, Rom
8:31) and if they be against me, what disadvantage reap I thereby;
since even all this also, worketh for my good? This is improving
the love of God and of Christ for my advantage. The same course
should Christians also take with the degrees of this love, even
set it against all the degrees of danger; for here deep calleth
unto deep. There cannot be wickedness and rage wrought up to
such or such a degree, as of which it may be said, there are not
degrees in the love of God and of Christ to match it. Wherein
Pharaoh dealt proudly against God's people, the Lord was above
him (Exo 18:11), did match and overmatch him; he came up to him,
and went beyond him; he collared with him, overcame him, and
cast him down. "The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name.
Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea--they
sank into the bottom as a stone" (Exo 15:5). There is no striving
against the Lord that hath loved us; there is none that strive
against him can prosper. If the shields of the earth be the Lord's
(Psa 47:9), then he can wield them for the safeguard of his body
the church; or if they are become incapable of being made use of
any longer in that way, and for such a thing, can he not lay them
aside, and make himself new ones? Men can do after this manner,
much more God. But again, if the miseries, or afflictions which
thou meetest with, seem to thee to overflow, and to go beyond
measure, above measure, and so to be above strength, and begin to
drive thee to despair of life (2 Cor 1:8); then thou hast also,
in the love of God, and of Christ, that which is above, and that
goes beyond all measure also, to wit, love unsearchable, unknown,
and "that can do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think." Now God hath set them one against the other, and 'twill
be thy wisdom to do so too, for this is the way to improve this
love. But, though it be easy, thus to admonish you to do, yet you
shall find the practical part more difficult; wherefore, here it
may not be amiss, if I add to these, another head of COUNSEL.

Counsel First, Then, Wouldest thou improve this love of God and
of Christ to thy advantage, Why then thou must labour after the
knowledge of it. This was it that the Apostle prayed for, for
these Ephesians, as was said before, and this is that that thou
must labour after, or else thy reading and my writing, will, as to
thee, be fruitless. Let me then say to thee, as David to his son
Solomon, "And thou Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy
father" (1 Chron 28:9). Empty notions of this love will do nothing
but harm, wherefore, they are not empty notions that I press thee
to rest in, but that thou labour after the knowledge of the favour
of this good ointment (Song 1:3), which the Apostle calleth the
favour of the knowledge of this Lord Jesus (2 Cor 2:14). Know it,
until it becometh sweet or pleasant to thy soul, and then it will
preserve and keep thee (Prov 2:10,11). Make this love of God and
of Christ thine own, and not another's. Many there are that can
talk largely of the love of God to Abraham, to David, to Peter and
Paul. But that is not the thing, give not over until this love
be made thine own; until thou find and feel it to run warm in
thy heart by the shedding of it abroad there, by the spirit that
God hath given thee (Rom 5:5). Then thou wilt know it with an
obliging and engaging knowledge; yea, then thou wilt know it with
a soul-strengthening, and soul-encouraging knowledge.

Counsel Second, Wouldest thou improve this love? then set it
against the love of all other things whatsoever, even until this
love shall conquer thy soul from the love of them to itself.

This is Christian. Do it therefore, and say, why should any thing
have my heart but God, but Christ? He loves me, he loves me with
love that passeth knowledge. He loves me, and he shall have me:
he loves me, and I will love him: his love stripped him of all for
my sake; Lord let my love strip me of all for thy sake. I am a son
of love, an object of love, a monument of love, of free love, of
distinguishing love, of peculiar love, and of love that passeth
knowledge: and why should not I walk in love? In love to God, in
love to men, in holy love, in love unfeigned? This is the way to
improve the love of God for thy advantage, for the subduing of
thy passions, and for sanctifying of thy nature. 'Tis an odious
thing to hear men of base lives talking of the love of God, of
the death of Christ, and of the glorious grace that is presented
unto sinners by the word of the truth of the gospel. Praise is
comely for the upright, not for the profane. Therefore let him
speak of love that is taken with love, that is captivated with
love, that is carried away with love. If this man speaks of it,
his speaking signifies something; the powers, and bands of love are
upon him, and he shews to all that he knows what he is speaking of.
But the very mentioning of love, is in the mouth of the profane,
like a parable in the mouth of fools, or as salt unsavory. Wherefore,
Christian, improve this love of God as thou shouldest, and that
will improve thee as thou wouldest. Wherefore,

Counsel Third, If thou wouldest improve this love, keep thyself
in it. "Keep yourselves in the love of God" (Jude 21). This text
looks as if it favoured the Socinians, but there is nothing of that
in it. And so doth that, "If ye keep my commandments, ye shall
abide in my love: even as I have kept my Father's commandments and
abide in his love" (John 15:10). The meaning then is this, that
living a holy life is the way, after a man has believed unto
justification, to keep himself in the savour and comfort of the
love of God. And Oh, that thou wouldest indeed so do. And that
because, if thou shall want the savour of it, thou will soon want
tenderness to the commandment, which is the rule by which thou
must walk, if thou wilt do good to thyself, or honour God in the
world. "To him that ordereth his conversation aright, will I shew
the salvation of God" (Psa 50:23). He that would live a sweet,
comfortable, joyful life, must live a very holy life. This is the
way to improve this love to thyself indeed.

Counsel Fourth, To this end, you must take root and be grounded
in love; that is, you must be well settled, and stablished in this
love, if indeed you would improve it. You must not be shaken as
to the doctrine and grounds of it (Eph 3:17). These you must be
well acquainted with: for he that is but a child in this doctrine,
is not capable as yet, of falling in with these exhortations: For
such waver, and fear when tempted; and "he that feareth is not
made perfect in love" (1 John 4:18), nor can he so improve it for
himself and soul's good as he should.

Counsel Fifth, and lastly, Keep, to this end, those grounds, and
evidences that God hath given you of your call to be partakers of
this love, with all clearness upon your hearts, and in your minds.
For he that wants a sight of them, or a proof that they are true
and good, can take but little comfort in this love. There is a
great mystery in the way of God with his people. He will justify
them without their works, he will pardon them for his Son's sake:
but they shall have but little comfort of what he hath done, doth,
and will do for them that are careless, carnal, and not holy in
their lives. Nor shall they have their evidences for heaven at
hand, nor out of doubt with them, yea, they shall walk without
the sun, and have their comforts by bits and knocks;16 while others
sit at their father's table, have liberty to go into the wine-cellar,
rejoice at the sweet and pleasant face of their heavenly Father
towards them; and know it shall go well with them at the end.

Something now for a conclusion should be spoken to the carnal
world, who have heard me tell of all this love. But what shall
I say unto them? If I should speak to them, and they should not
hear; or if I should testify unto them, and they should not believe;
or intreat them, and they should scorn me; all will but aggravate,
and greaten their sin, and tend to their further condemnation.
And therefore I shall leave the obstinate where I found him, and
shall say to him that is willing to be saved, Sinner, thou hast
the advantage of thy neighbour, not only because thou art willing
to live, but because there are [those] that are willing thou
shouldest; to wit, those unto whom the issues from death do belong,
and they are the Father and the Son, to whom be glory with the
blessed Spirit of grace, world without end. Amen.

FOOTNOTES:

1 In the first edition of this treatise, which was published four
years after Bunyan's death, this is quoted "deeper than the sea,"
probably a typographical error. It is afterwards quoted correctly.--Ed.

2 How admirably does Bunyan bring home to the Christian's heart
these solemn truths. The breadth and length and depth and height
of our guilt and misery, requires a remedy beyond all human power.
This can only be found in the love of God in Christ: this extends
beyond all bounds. It is divine, unsearchable, eternal mercy,
swallowing up all our miseries.--Ed.

3 Shuck, a corruption of shrug, to express horror by motions of
the body.

4 This is a very striking application of these words of David,
which so fearfully describe the agitation of those who are exposed
to a hurricane at sea. We too generally limit this passage to
its literal sense. To Bunyan, who had passed through such a deep
experience of the "terrors of the Lord," when he came out of
tribulation and anguish, he must have richly enjoyed the solemn
imagery of these words, depicting the inmost feelings of his soul
when in the horrible deeps of doubt and despair. But young Christians
must not be distressed because they have never experienced such
tempests: thousands of vessels of mercy get to heaven, without
meeting with hurricanes in their way.--Ed.

5 How thankful should we be, for the great spread of gospel light
in this country, since Bunyan's days. He for refusing to attend,
what he considered, an unscriptural church; suffered above twelve
years incarceration in a miserable den; while all his friends were
either imprisoned or plundered. It was a dreadful attempt to root
out Christianity from this country; but was overruled to make it
take deeper root. How long will Antichrist still hold up his head
in this country? He has had some hard knocks of late.--Ed.

6 The descent of Christ into hell has been the subject of much
controversy, and the question is as far from solution now as
it was in the dark ages, when it was first propounded, and then
arbitrarily decreed to be an article of faith. Those who explain hell
as hades, the place of departed souls, or of the dead generally,
fortify themselves with Psalm 139:8, and also Psalm 16:10; and
yet the first passage may only imply the omnipresence of God, and
the second, the resurrection of the incorruptible body of Christ
from the grave. The descent of Christ into the place of torment is
a figment, a monkish fable, in which Bible incidents and heathen
myths are woven together to delude a credulous and ignorant
laity. The formulary designated the Apostles' creed, has, beyond
question, a high claim to antiquity, but none whatever to be the
work of the Apostles themselves. The "descent into hell" was an
after interpolation, and its rejection has been suggested.--Ed.

7 This is one of those strikingly solemn passages, which abound in
Bunyan's works. It almost irresistibly brings to our imagination
his expressive countenance, piercing eyes and harmonious voice;
pressed on by his rapid conceptions and overpowering natural
eloquence. How must it have riveted the attention of a great
congregation. It is a rush of words, rolling on like the waves of
the sea; increasing in grandeur and in force as they multiply in
number.--Ed.

8 The reader must not misunderstand the word common as here applied
to the Saviour. It has the same meaning that is applied to a piece
of land, to which many persons have an equal or common right;
but which none but those, who have a right or title, can use. It
strikingly illustrates the union of Christ and his church.--Ed.

9 There is no affectation of learning in Bunyan's giving the meaning
of the Hebrew word, Metheg; it is translated in the margin of our
Bibles, "the bridle" of Ammah.--Ed.

10 Bunyan seems here evidently to refer to the case of unregenerate
and worldly men entering into the ministry, and making a public
and solemn declaration that they "are inwardly moved thereto by
the Holy Ghost," and "truly called according to the will of our
Lord Jesus Christ." See form and manner of ordaining deacons and
priests in the Church of England.--Ed.

11 Bunyan quotes this passage from the puritan version; vulgarly
called "The Breeches Bible." The present authorized translation
is "might be rich."

12 "Virtue," secret agency: efficacy without visible or material
action. "Walker's Dictionary."--Ed.

13 "Improving," not in quality but by extending the benefits,
employing to good purpose; turning to profitable account.--Ed.

14 How delightfully has Bunyan brought forth the marrow of this
important text. He felt that those who were filled with all the
fullness of God, sweetened the churches in his day; they were
wanted then; are they not equally wanted now?--Ed.

15 Bunyan lived in singularly eventful times. Under the Commonwealth
the strictest outward morality was enforced. But when a licentious
monarch was placed upon the throne, a flood of the grossest
debauchery was let loose; and those hypocrites, who had put on a
cloak of religion to serve a temporary purpose, threw it off and
became ringleaders in the vilest iniquities. See Matthew 12:43-45.--Ed.

16 "Bits and knocks"; this phrase is now obsolete: it alludes to a
dog at table, who while picking up the crumbs, often gets a bite
and a buffet or knock with it, but still perseveres.--Ed.

***

OF ANTICHRIST, AND HIS RUIN: AND OF THE SLAYING THE WITNESSES.

BY JOHN BUNYAN



PREFATORY REMARKS BY THE EDITOR

This important treatise was prepared for the press, and left by
the author, at his decease, to the care of his surviving friend
for publication. It first appeared in a collection of his works
in folio, 1692; and although a subject of universal interest; most
admirably elucidated; no edition has been published in a separate
form.

Antichrist has agitated the Christian world from the earliest ages;
and his craft has been to mislead the thoughtless, by fixing upon
the humble followers of the Lamb his own opprobrious proper name.
The mass of professed Christians, whose creed and mode of worship
have been provided by human laws, has ever been opposed to the sincere
disciples of Christ. To imbibe every principle from investigation
and conviction of the holy oracles--to refuse submission to any
authority in the spiritual kingdom of God, except it is to Christ,
the supreme head and only lawgiver in his church--to refuse
obedience to human laws in the great concern of salvation and of
worship; whether those laws or decrees emanate from a Darius, a
Nebuchadnezzar, a Bourbon, a Tudor, or a Stuart--to be influenced
by the spirit which animated Daniel, the three Hebrew youths, and
the martyrs, brought down denunciations upon them, and they were
called antichristian: but alas! the sincere disciples of Jesus have
ever known and FELT who and what is Antichrist. They have been
in dungeons--racked and tormented--transported--drowned--hung or
burned. The most frightful atrocities have been committed upon
the most peaceful and valuable members of society; because they
valued their soul's peace in preference to temporal advantages.
These cruelties are THY cursed deeds, O Antichrist! The hand
writing against thee is exhibited in blood-stained and indelible
characters. The Great God has decreed thy downfall and ruin--"That
wicked--whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth,"
(2 Thess 2:8). All who are found partakers in his community, must
be consumed with an everlasting destruction. No "paper-winkers" 1
can hide this truth from the enlightened regenerated mind. "O my
soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly, mine
honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it
was cruel!"

In Bunyan's time great cruelties were practised to compel
uniformity. To that absurd shrine many thousand invaluable lives
were sacrificed. Blessed be God, that happier days have dawned upon
us. Antichrist can no longer put the Christian to a cruel death.
It very rarely sends one to prison for refusing obedience to human
laws that interfere with religious worship. "My kingdom is not of
this world," said the Redeemer: and his followers dare not render
unto Caesar, or temporal governments, that which belongs exclusively
to God. Human coercion, in anything connected with religion, whether
it imposes creeds, liturgies, or modes of worship, is Antichrist:
whom to obey, is spiritual desolation, and if knowingly persevered
in, leads to death.

On the contrary, the kingdom of Christ is love, meekness, forbearance,
persuasion, conviction, and holy faith. The Christian who dares
not obey Antichrist may still, in some countries, suffer personal
violence; but the olden cruelties have given way to the spread of
the gospel. Should the wicked spirit of persecution still light
its unhallowed fire in any sect; may heaven forgive and convert
such misguided men, before the divine wrath shall consume all
that pertains to Antichrist. "Come out from among them and be ye
separate, saith the Lord."

Bunyan conceives that previous to the universal triumphs of the
Saviour, Antichrist will spread his influence over the whole earth;
and the church be hidden from outward observation, in the hearts
of believers. This idea, which was also cherished by Dr. Gill,
and others, deserves careful consideration; while we keep in mind,
that leaven which must spread, however invisible in its operation,
until the whole earth shall be leavened.

The dread enemy may yet appear in a different shape to any that
he has hitherto assumed. When mankind, by the spread of knowledge,
shall throw off the absurdities and disgraceful trammels of
hypocrisy, fanaticism, and tyranny, which has so long oppressed
them; there may be experienced a vast overflowing of infidelity,
and perverted reason assume the place of Antichrist. Through
this and all other opposing systems, Christianity must make its
irresistible progress: all that opposes is doomed to ruin by the
Great God. Every heart will be subdued by that blessed knowledge,
which has the promise of the life that now is as well as of that
which is to come. Bloodless victory! The ark being exhibited, every
Dagon must fall before it, then shall be realized the heavenly
anthem, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good
will towards men."

GEORGE OFFOR.

A PREMONITION TO THE READER.

After that God had delivered Babylon and her king into the hands
of the kings of the Medes and Persians, then began the liberty
of the Jews, from their long and tedious captivity: For though
Nebuchadnezzar and his sons did tyrannically enslave, and hold
them under; yet so wrought God with the hearts of those kings that
succeeded them, that they made proclamation to them to go home,
and build their city, temple, &c., and worship their own God
according to his own law (2 Chron 30:6; Ezra 1). But because I
would not be tedious in enumerating instances for the clearing of
this, therefore I will content myself with one, and with a brief
note upon it. It is that in the seventh of Ezra 26: 'And whosoever
will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be to death, or
to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.'
This is the conclusion of a letter that king Artaxerxes gave to
Ezra the priest and scribe, when he granted his petition, and gave
him leave to go to Jerusalem to build the temple, and to offer
sacrifice there to the God whose house is in Jerusalem. And
a conclusion it was, both comfortable and sharp; comfortable to
Ezra and his companions, but sharp unto his enemies. I shall here
present you with a copy of the letter at large.

'Artaxerxes, king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the
law of the God of heaven, perfect peace, and at such a time. I
make a decree, that all they of the people of Israel, and of his
priests and levites, in my realm, which are minded of their own
free-will to go up to Jerusalem, go with thee. Forasmuch as thou
art sent of the king, and of his seven counsellors, to inquire
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law of thy God
which is in thine hand; And to carry the silver and gold, which
the king and his counsellors have freely offered unto the God of
Israel, whose habitation is in Jerusalem. And all the silver and
gold that thou canst find in all the province of Babylon, with
the free-will-offering of the people, and of the priests, offering
willingly for the house of their God which is in Jerusalem: That
thou mayest buy speedily with this money bullocks, rams, lambs,
with their meat-offerings and their drink-offerings, and offer them
upon the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem.
And whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and to thy brethren, to do
with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the will
of your God. The vessels also that are given thee for the service
of the house of thy God, those deliver thou before the God of
Jerusalem. And whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of
thy God, which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow it out
of the king's treasure-house. And I, even I Artaxerxes the king,
do make a decree to all the treasurers which are beyond the river,
that whatsoever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the
God of heaven, shall require of you, it be done speedily. Unto an
hundred talents of silver, and to an hundred measures of wheat,
and to an hundred baths of wine, and to an hundred baths of oil,
and salt without prescribing how much. Whatsoever is commanded by
the God of heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of the
God of heaven: for why should there be wrath against the realm of
the king and his sons? Also we certify you, that touching any of
the priests and levites, singers, porters, nethinims, or ministers
of this House of God, it shall not be lawful to impose toll,
tribute, or custom, upon them. And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom
of thy God, that is in thine hand, set magistrates and judges,
which may judge all the people that are beyond the river, all
such as know the laws of thy God; and teach ye them that know them
not. And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of
the king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it
be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or
to imprisonment' (Ezra 7:11-26).

This is the letter; and now for the scope thereof. First, Generally.
Secondly, Particularly.

GENERALLY. The general scope of the letter is this: A grant given
by the king to Ezra the scribe, to go to Jerusalem, and build there
the temple of God, and offer sacrifice in it according to the law:
With commissions annexed thereunto, to the king's lieutenants,
treasurers and governors on that side the river, to further the
work with such things as by the king was commanded they should.

PARTICULARLY. But we will consider the matter particularly. 1.
As to the manner of the grant which the king gave to Ezra and his
brethren to go thither. 2. As to the king's grant, with reference
to their building, and way of worship. 3. With reference to the
king's liberality and gifts towards the building of the temple,
and by what rules it was to be bestowed. 4. As to the way that the
king concluded they should be governed in their own land. 5. With
reference to the king's charge to his officers that were thereabout,
not to hinder Ezra in his work. 6. And lastly, with reference to
the king's threat and commandment to do judgment if they should
hinder it.

First, As to the manner of the grant that the king gave to Ezra and
his brethren to go to build, it was such an one as forced none,
but left every Jew to his own choice, whether he would go, or
forbear. The words are these: 'Artaxerxes, king of kings, unto
Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect
peace, and at such a time. I make a decree, that all they of the
people of Israel, and of his priests and levites, in my realm,
which are minded of their own free-will to go up to Jerusalem, go
with thee' (verse 12,13).

Thus gracious then was the king: He made a decree, That all they
of the captive Jews, their priests and levites, that would return
to their own land, to build their temple, and to sacrifice there,
might: He would hinder none, force none, but left them free, to
do as they would.

Secondly, As to the king's grant, with reference to their building,
and way of worship there, nothing was to be done therein, but
according to the law of the God of Ezra, which was in his hands
(verse 14). Hence, when he was come to Jerusalem, he was to inquire
concerning Judah and Jerusalem; to wit, what was wanting in order
to the temple and worship of God there, according to the law of
his God, which was in his hand. Also when they went about to build,
and to sacrifice, all was to be done according as was commanded by
the God of heaven (verse 23): Yea, this was granted by the king,
and his seven counsellors.

Thirdly, As to the king's liberality towards the building of this
house, &c. it was large: He gave silver, gold, bullocks, rams,
lambs; with wheat, wine, oil, and salt (verse 17,22); but would by
his royal power, give no orders how in particular things should
be bestowed, but left all that to Ezra the priest, to do with it
according to the will, word, or law of his God (verse 18).

Fourthly, As to the way that the king concluded they should be
governed in their own land, it was by their own laws; yea, he did
bid Ezra the priest, after the wisdom of his God that was in his
hand, set magistrates and judges, which might judge all the people,
&c. only he bid him make them such, which did know the law of his
God: Also the king added, That they should teach it to them that
knew it not.

Fifthly, As to the king's officers, he gave them a charge not to
hinder, but further this work. To further this work, not by putting
their hand thereto, (that was to be left to the Jews alone, especially
to Ezra, according to the law of his God,) but that they should
speedily give him such things which the king had commanded, to
wit, silver, and wheat, and wine, and oil, and salt, for their
encouragement; and to do therewith, as by the law of their God
they should. Further, That they should not impose toll, tribute,
or custom, upon the priests, levites, singers, porters, nethinims,
or ministers (verse 20-22).

Sixthly, And now we come to the conclusion, to wit, the king's
threat and command to do judgment on them that obeyed not the law
of Ezra's God, and the king.

Considering what hath been said before, I conclude,

1. That this king imposed no law, no priest, no people upon these
Jews; but left them wholly to their own law, their own ministers,
and their own people: All which were the laws of God, the priests
of God, the people of God, as to their building of their temple,
and the worship of their God.

2. He forced not THIS people, no, not to their land, their temple,
nor their worship, by his or their law; but left them free to
their own mind, to do thereabout as they would.

3. He added not any law therefore of his own, either to prescribe
worship, or to enforce it upon the Jews.

But you will say, upon what then was the threatening and the command
to punish grounded? I answer, upon a supposed breach of two laws.
He of the Jews, that in Jerusalem, rebelled against the law of
the Lord, was in his own land left by the king to be punished by
the same law, according to the penalties thereof: And he of the
king's officers, that refused to do the king's laws, that refused
to give the Jews such things as the king commanded, and that would
yet exact such customs and tributes as the king forbade, should be
punished by the king's laws, whether unto death or unto banishment,
or unto confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.

And if all kings would but give such liberty, to wit, that God's
people should be directed in their temple-building, and temple
worship, as they find it in the law of their God, without the
additions of man's inventions: and if all kings did but lay the
same penalty upon them of their pretended servants, that should
hinder this work, which this brave king Artaxerxes laid upon his;
how many of the enemies of the Jews, before this time, would have
been hanged, banished, had their goods confiscated to the king,
or their bodies shut up in prison! The which we desire not; we
desire only that this letter of the king might be considered of,
and we left to do as is there licensed and directed: And when we
do the contrary, let us be punished by the law of God, as we are
his servants, and by the law of the king, as we are his subjects;
and we shall never complain.

Only I cannot but observe how prettily it is done of some, who urge
this text to colour their malice, ignorance and revenge withal,
while they cry, The law of God, and The law of the king, when they
will neither let, according to this scripture, the law of God,
nor the law of the king take place: Not the law of God; for that
they will not leave us to that, to square and govern ourselves in
temple-work, and sacrificing by. Nor will they do the law of the
king, which has made void, ipso facto, whatever law is against
the word of God; but because themselves can do, they will
force us to do so too. 2

Before I leave this, I would touch once again upon the candour
of this king Artaxerxes, who thus did: Because he gave this leave
and license to the Jews, contrary (if he had any) to his own
national worship; yea, and also to the impairing of his own incomes.
Methinks he should have a religion of his own; and that, not that
of the Jews, because he was a Gentile; and not, as we read of,
proselyted to the Jews religion. Indeed, he spake reverently of
the God of Israel, and of his temple-worship, and sacrifices, as
did also several other kings; but that will not prove that he was
adapted to that religion.

That his incomes were impaired, 'tis evident; because he took
off toll, tribute, and custom from them, of whom mention is made
before; nor is it, I think, to be believed, that he did exact it
of their brethren. But we may see what the Lord can do; for thus
to do, was put into the heart of the king by the God of heaven
(verse 27). This therefore ariseth not of nature: no more did the
kindness of Cyrus or Darius, of whom we read in the beginning of
this history. As God therefore did put it into the hearts of the
wicked kings of Babylon, to distress his church and people for
their sins; so he put it into the hearts of the kings of the Medes
and Persians, who were to be, in a sense, their saviours; to ease
them of those distresses, to take off the yoke, and let them go
free. Indeed, there was an Artaxerxes that put a stop to this work
of God (chap 4), and he also was of the kings that had destroyed
the Babylonians; for it doth not follow, because God hath begun
to deliver his people, that therefore their deliverance must be
completed without stop or let. The protestants in France had more
favour formerly, than from their prince they at this time have;
yet I doubt not but that God will make that horn also one of them
(in his time) that (indeed) shall hate the whore. As the sins of
God's people brought them into captivity; so their sins can hold
them there; yea, and when the time comes that grace must fetch
them out, yet the oxen that draw this cart may stumble; and the
way through roughness, may shake it sorely. However, heaven rules
and over-rules; and by one means and another, as the captivity of
Israel did seem to linger, so it came out at the time appointed;
in the way that best pleased God, most profited them, and that
most confounded those that were their implacable enemies. This
therefore should instruct those that yet dwell where the woman
sitteth, to quietness and patience.

To quietness: For God rules, and has the dispose of things. Besides,
it is a kind of arraigning of his wisdom, to be discontent at that
which at present is upon the wheel. Above all, it displeases him
that any should seek, or go about to revenge their own injuries,
or to work their own deliverances; for that is the work of God,
and he will do it by the kings: Nor is he weak, nor has he missed
the opportunity; nor doth he sleep but waketh, and waiteth to be
gracious.

This also should teach them to be patient, and put them upon bearing
what at present they may undergo, patiently. Let them wait upon
God; patiently let them wait upon men, and patiently let them bear
the fruits of their own transgressions; which though they should
be none other but a deferring of the mercy wished for, is enough
to try, and crack, and break their patience, if a continual supply,
and a daily increase thereof be not given by the God of heaven.

And before I do conclude this, let me also add one word more; to
wit, to exhort them to look that they may see that which God at
present may be doing among the Babylonians.

When God had his people into Babylon of old, he presented them
with such rarities there, as he never shewed them in their own
country. And is there nothing now to be seen by them that are not
yet delivered from that oppression, that may give them occasion to
stay themselves and wonder! What, is preservation nothing? What,
is baffling and befooling the enemies of God's church nothing? In
the Maryan days here at home, there was such sweet songs sung in
the fire, such sweet notes answering them from prison, and such
providences, that coals of burning fire still dropped here and
there upon the heads of those that hated God; that it might, and
doubtless did make those that did wisely consider of God's doings,
to think God was yet near, with, and for, a despised and afflicted
people.3

I conclude then, first with a word of counsel, and then with a
word of caution.

First, Let us mend our pace in the way of reformation, that
is the way to hasten the downfall of Antichrist, ministers need
reforming, particular congregations need reforming, there are but
few church-members but need reforming. This twenty years we have
been degenerating, both as to principles, and as to practice; and
have grown at last into an amazing likeness to the world, both as
to religion and civil demeanour: Yea, I may say, so remiss have
churches been in instructing those that they have received into
fellowship with them; and so careless have the received been, of
considering the grounds of their coming into churches, that most
members, in some places, seem now to be at a loss; yea, and those
churches stand with their fingers in their mouths, and are as if
they would not, durst not, or could not help it.

My Second is, A word of caution.

1. Take heed of over-looking, or of shutting your eyes upon your
own guilt: 'He that covereth his sins, shall not prosper.' It is
incident to some men, when they find repentance is far from them,
to shut their eyes upon their own guilt, and to please themselves
with such notions of deliverance from present troubles, as will
stand with that course of sin which is got into their families,
persons, and professions, and with a state of impenitence: But I
advise you to take heed of this.

2. Take heed in laying the cause of your troubles in the badness
of the temper of governors. I speak not now with reflection upon
any, excepting those concerned in this caution: God is the chief,
and has the hearts of all, even of the worst of men, in his hand.
Good tempered men have sometimes brought trouble; and bad tempered
men have sometimes brought enlargement to the churches of God:
Saul brought enlargement (1 Sam 14:28). David brought trouble (2
Sam 12:10). Ahab brought enlargement (1 Kings 21:29). Jehoshaphat
and Hezekiah did both sometimes bring trouble (2 Chron 19:2; 20:35;
32:25). Therefore, the good or bad tempers of men sway nothing
with God in this matter; they are the sins or repentances of his
people, that make the church either happy or miserable upon earth.

Take heed, I say therefore, of laying of the trouble of the church
of God at the doors of governors; especially at the doors of kings,
who seldom trouble churches of their own inclinations: (I say,
seldom; for some have done so, as Pharaoh:) But I say, lay not the
cause of your trouble there; for oftentimes they see with other
men's eyes, hear with other men's ears, and act and do by the
judgments of others: Thus did Saul, when he killed the priests of
the Lord (1 Sam 22:18); and thus did Darius, when he cast Daniel
into the lions' den (Dan 6:7). But rather labour to see the true
cause of trouble, which is sin; and to attain to a fitness to be
delivered out thence, and that is by repentance, and amendment
of life. If any object, That God oft-times delivers his of mere
grace: I answer, That's no thanks to them; besides, we must mind
our duty. Further, When God comes to save his people, he can cut
off such objectors, if they be impenitent, as the sinners of his
people; and can save his church, without letting of them be sharers
in that salvation: So he served many in the wilderness; and 'tis
to be feared, so he will serve many at the downfall of Antichrist.

I shall say no more, but to testify my loyalty to my king, my love
to my brethren, and service for my country, has been the cause of
this my present scribble. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord,

J. BUNYAN.



OF ANTICHRIST.

Antichrist is the adversary of Christ; an adversary really, a friend
pretendedly: So then, Antichrist is one that is against Christ;
one that is for Christ, and one that is contrary to him: And this
is that mystery of iniquity (2 Thess 2:7). Against him in deed;
for him in word, and contrary to him in practice. Antichrist is
so proud as to go before Christ; so humble as to pretend to come
after him, and so audacious as to say that himself is he. Antichrist
will cry up Christ; Antichrist will cry down Christ: Antichrist
will proclaim that himself is one above Christ. Antichrist is the
man of sin, the son of perdition; a beast, [that] hath two horns
like a lamb, but speaks as a dragon (Rev 13:11).

Christ is the Son of God; Antichrist is the son of Hell.

Christ is holy, meek, and forbearing: Antichrist is wicked,
outrageous, and exacting.

Christ seeketh the good of the soul: Antichrist seeks his own
avarice and revenge.

Christ is content to rule by his word: Antichrist saith, The word
is not sufficient.

Christ preferreth his Father's will above heaven and earth: Antichrist
preferreth himself and his traditions above all that is written,
or that is called God, or worshiped.

Christ has given us such laws and rules as are helpful and healthful
to the soul: Antichrist seeketh to abuse those rules to our hurt
and destruction.

Antichrist may be considered either more particularly, or more
generally. 1. More particularly: And so there are many Antichrists
(1 John 2:18). 2. More generally: And so the many maketh but one
great Antichrist, one man of sin, one enemy, one great whore, one
son of perdition (2 Thess 2:3; Rev 19:2).

Again, Antichrist must be distinguished, with respect to his more
internal and external parts; and so there is the spirit, soul, or
life (1 John 4:3); and also the body and flesh of Antichrist (2
Thess 2:7). The spirit, or soul, or life of Antichrist, is that
spirit of error, that wicked, that mystery of iniquity, that under
colour and pretence of verity, draweth men from truth to falsehood.
The body or flesh of Antichrist, is that heap of men, that assembly
of the wicked, that synagogue of Satan that is acted and governed
by that spirit. But God will destroy both soul and body; He 'shall
consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both
soul and body: [or from the soul, even to the flesh] and they shall
be [both soul and body] as when a standard-bearer fainteth' (Isa
10:18).

A PARTICULAR DESCRIPTION OF ANTICHRIST.

Antichrist therefore is a mystical man, so made, or begotten of
the devil, and sent into the world, himself being the chief and
highest of him. Three things therefore go to the making up of
Antichrist, the head, body, and soul. The devil he is the head;
the synagogue of Satan, that is the body; that wicked spirit of
iniquity, that is the soul of Antichrist. Christ then is the head
of his church; the devil is the head of Antichrist; the elect
are the body of Christ; the reprobate professors are the body of
Antichrist; the Holy Ghost is the spirit of life that actuateth
Christ's body; that wicked spirit of iniquity, is that which
actuateth the body of Antichrist. Thus therefore are the two great
mighties set forth before us, who are the heads of those two
bodies; and thus are these two bodies set before us, who are to
be actuated by these two spirits.

The reason why Christ came into the world, was, That he might
destroy all the works of the head of Antichrist, and they which he
endeavoureth to complete by his wicked spirit working in his body
(1 John 3:8). And the reason why Antichrist came into the world,
was, That the church, which is the body of Christ, might be tried,
and made white by suffering under his tyranny, and by bearing
witness against his falsehoods. For, for the trial of the faithful,
and for the punishment of the world, Antichrist was admitted to
come: But when he came, he first appeared there where one would
have thought there had been no place nor corner for his reception.

WHERE ANTICHRIST FIRST APPEARED.

The devil then, made use of the church of God to midwife this
monster into the world, as the Apostle plainly shews, there he
first sat, shewing himself (2 Thess 2:4). Here therefore was his
first appearance, even in the church of God: Not that the church of
God did willingly admit him there to sit as such; he had covered
his cloven foot; he had plumbs in his dragon's mouth, and so came
in by flatteries; promising to do for Christ and his church, that
which he never meant to perform. For he shewed himself that he
was God, and in appearance, set his heart to do as the heart of
God (Eze 28:2-6). And who could have found in their hearts to shut
the door upon such an one? True, he came, when he came thither,
out of the bottomless-pit; but there came such a smoke out thence
with him, and that smoke so darkened the light of the sun, of the
moon, of the stars, and of the day, that had they [the church] been
upon their watch, as they were not, they could not have perceived
him from another man. Besides, there came with him so many locusts
to usher him into the house of God (Rev 9:2,3), and they so suited
the flesh and reason of the godly of that day, that with good words
and fair speeches, by their crafty and cunning sleights, whereby
they lay in wait to deceive, they quite got him in, and set him
up, and made him a great one, even the chief, before they were
aware. Further, He quickly got him a beast to ride on, far, for
sumptuous glory, beyond (though as to nature, as assish a creature
as) that on which Baalam was wont to ride: And by this exaltation
he became not only more stately, but the horns of the beast would
push for him (Rev 17:3-6).

Again, This man of sin, when he came into the world, had the art of
metamorphosing, and could change himself, both in form and shape,
into the likeness of a beast, a man, or woman; and the kings of
the earth, with the inhabitants of the world, began then to love
such women dearly; wherefore they went to her into the bed of love,
and defiled themselves with the filthiness of her fornications,
gave her their troth, and became her husbands, and beloved sons;
took up helmet and shield, and stood to defend her; yea, though
Christ himself, and some of the chief of his followers, cried out
of her shame, and of the evil of their doings; yet would she be
audacious.

Also this woman had now arrayed herself in flesh-taking ornaments,
of the colour of purple and scarlet, and was decked with gold,
and precious stones, and pearls, after the manner or attire of
harlots. Thus came she to them, and lay in their bosoms, and gave
them out of her golden cup of the wine of her fornication; of the
which they bibbed till they were drunken; and then, in requital,
they also gave her of such liquors as they could, to wit, to drink
of the blood of saints, and of martyrs of Jesus, till she, like
these beasts, was drunken also.

Now when they were drunken, they did as drunkards do, revel, roar,
and belch out their own shame, in the sight of them that were
sober: Wherefore they cried out upon such doings, and chose rather
to die, than to live with such company. And so 'tis still with
them where she yet sitteth, and so will be till she shall fall
into the hands of the strong Lord, who will judge her according
to her ways. And that she must do, as is implied by this, That
her fornications are in a cup; she has therefore but her cup to
be drank out; wherefore when it is empty, then, whether she will
or no, the Lord God will call her to such a reckoning, that all
the clothes on her back, with what pearls and jewels she has,
shall not be able to pay the shot.

OF THE RUIN OF ANTICHRIST.

Antichrist, as was said, had a time to come into the world, and so
must have a time to go out again: For although he saith that he
is a God, yet must he be subject to the will of God, and must go
as well as come according to that will. Nor can all the fallen
angels, with all the members and limbs of Antichrist, cause that
this their brat should abide so much as one day longer than our
God's prefixed time. And this the head of Antichrist understandeth
very well: Wherefore the Holy Ghost saith, 'Woe to the inhabiters
of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short
time' (Rev 12:12).

Besides, the text says plainly, The Lord shall destroy him (2 Thess
2:8), and that he goeth into perdition (Rev 17:11; 19:26). Also
the church of God believes it, and the limbs of Antichrist fear
it.

Now when, or as his time shall come to be destroyed, so he shall
be made a hand of; and that with such instruments and weapons of
God's indignation, as best shall be suited to his several parts.

Such weapons as are best for the destroying of his soul, shall be
used for the destroying of it; and such weapons as are best for the
destroying of his body, shall be made use of for the destroying
of it.

THE SOUL OF IT DESTROYED, AND HOW.

And therefore, as to his soul, or that spirit of error that governs
him in all his works of mischief; this must be consumed by the
spirit of Christ's mouth, and be destroyed by the brightness of
his coming.

This we have in the words of Paul: 'For [saith he] the mystery of
iniquity [the spirit of Antichrist] doth already work: only he who
now letteth, will let, until he be taken out of the way. And then
shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming' (2 Thess 2:7,8). The Apostle here treateth of Antichrist,
with reference to his more subtil and spiritual part, since that
indeed is the chiefest of Antichrist: Wherefore he calls it that
wicked; not, that wicked one, as referring to the whole; but that
wicked, as referring to the mystery or spirit of iniquity, the
heart and soul of Antichrist; and tells us, that the Lord shall
'consume him with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy him
with the brightness of his coming.'

Now, by the spirit of his mouth, I understand his holy word, which
is called 'The word and breath of his lips' (Isa 11:4). And also,
'The sword of his mouth' (Rev 2:16). By 'the brightness of his
coming,' I also understand, not only his presence, but an increase
of light by his presence; not only to help Christians to begin
to bear witness against some parts and pieces of the errors
of Antichrist, but until the whole is rooted out of the world.
By this, I say, must the soul, spirit, or life of Antichrist be
taken away. But how shall Christ by this rod, sword, or spirit of
his mouth, consume this wicked, this mystery of iniquity? Not by
himself immediately, but by his spirit and word in his church;
the which he will use, and so manage in this work, that they shall
not rest till he by them has brought this beast to his grave. This
beast is compared to the wild boar, and the beast that comes out
of the wood to devour the church of God, (as we read in the book
of Psalms: 80:13) But Christ, with the dogs that eat the crumbs
of his table, will so hunt and scour him about, that albeit he
may let out some of their bowels with the tushes of his chaps,
yet they will not let him alone till they have his life: For the
church shall single him out from all beasts, and so follow him
with cries, and pinch him with their voices, that he alone shall
perish by their means.4 Thus shall Christ consume and wear him out
by the spirit of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightness
of his coming

Hence you find again, That this wicked, is to melt and consume
away as grease: For the Lord Jesus shall consume him, and cause
him to melt away; not all at once, but now this part, and then
that; now his soul, and after that his body, even until soul and
body are both destroyed.

And that you may be convinced of the truth of this thing, do but
look back and compare Antichrist four or five hundred years ago,
with Antichrist as he is now, and you shall see what work the Lord
Jesus has begun to make with him, even with the spirit and soul,
and life of Antichrist; both in confounding and blasting of it by
this spirit of his mouth, as also by forcing of it to dishonourable
retreats, and by making of it give up to him, as the conqueror,
not only some of his superstitious and diabolical rites and
ceremonies, to be destroyed, but many a goodly truth, which this
vile one had taken from his church, to be renewed to them: Nay,
further, he hath also already began to take from him both kingdoms
and countries, though as to some not so absolutely as he shall do
by and by. And in the meantime, this is the plague wherewith the
Lord shall plague or smite the people that have fought against
Jerusalem: 'Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon
their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and
their tongue shall consume away in their mouth' (Zech 14:12). And
how has this long ago been fulfilled here in England! as also in
Scotland, Holland, Germany, France, Sweden, Denmark, Hungary, and
other places! (Isa 17:4-6). Nor hath this spirit of Antichrist,
with all his art and artificers, been able to reduce to Antichrist
again, those people, nations, or parts of nations, that by the
spirit of Christ's mouth, and 'the brightness of his coming,'
have been made to forsake him, and to turn from him to Christ:
The reason is, for that the Lord has not retreated, but is still
going on in the spirit of his mouth, and his brightness, to
make that conquest over him that is determined, in the way that
is determined: Of which more shall be spoken afterward; for the
path-way that he goeth, is as the shining light, which shines
more and more unto noon. True, the fogs of Antichrist, and the
smoke that came with him out of the bottomless-pit, has darkened
and eclipsed the glorious light of the gospel: But you know, in
eclipses, when they are on the recovering hand, all the creatures
upon the face of the earth cannot put a stop to that course, until
the sun or the moon have recovered their glory. And thus it shall
be now, the Lord is returned to visit the earth, and his people
with his primitive lustre; he will not go back, nor slack his hand,
until he has recovered what Antichrist has darkened of his. 'The
anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have executed, and
till he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter days
ye shall consider it perfectly' (Jer 23:20). Therefore he saith
again, 'The light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun [was
in her eclipse;] and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as
the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord bindeth up the
breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound,' &c.
as the verse before has it: 'In the day when the towers fall.' For
(as was said before) as to the recovery of the light of the gospel
from under antichristian mists, and fogs of darkness; Christ will
do that, not by might nor power, but by the spirit of his mouth,
and the brightness of his coming: Wherefore the soul of Antichrist,
or that spirit of wickedness by which this gospel-light hath been
diminished, must be consumed and destroyed by that spirit also. Nor
can any other way of conquest over that be thorough, and lasting;
because that spirit can by no other means be slain. The body
of Antichrist may be destroyed by other instruments, but spirits
cannot be killed but by spirits. The temporal sword then may kill
the body, but after that it hath no more that it can do, wherefore,
the other must be dealt with by another kind of weapon: And here
is one sufficient, the spirit against the spirit; the spirit and
face of Christ, against the spirit, that wicked, of Antichrist.
And by this spirit of Christ's mouth, all the spirit that is in
all the trinkets and wash of Antichrist shall also be destroyed;
so that those trinkets, those rites, ceremonies, and ordinances
of this man of sin, shall be left as carrion upon the face of the
earth, and shall stink in the noses of men, as doth the corrupted
blood of a dead man.

THE ORDINANCES OF ANTICHRIST.

Now therefore will the beauty of Antichrist fade like a flower,
and fall as doth a leaf when the sap of the tree has left it; or
as the beauty departeth from the body, when the soul, or life,
or spirit is gone forth. And as the body cannot be but unpleasant
and unsavoury when under such a state; so the body of Antichrist
will be to beholders, when the Lord has slain the spirit thereof.
It is the spirit of Antichrist that puts life into the body; and
that puts lustre into the ordinances of Antichrist, as the light
of the sun, and of the moon, and of the stars, do put lustre upon
the things of this visible world: Wherefore, when this spirit, and
soul, and life of Antichrist is slain, then it will be with him
as 'twould be with the world, had it no light of the sun, of the
moon, or of the stars.

And hence, as the loss of our natural life is compared to the loss
of these lights (Eccl 12:2); so the loss of the life, soul and
spirit of Antichrist is compared to these things also. For, the
soul of Antichrist is compared to a heaven; and her ordinances
and rites, to the ordinances of heaven: wherefore, when the Lord
comes to fight against her with the spirit of his mouth, he saith,
'The stars of heaven [shall be darkened], and the constellations
thereof shall not give their light' (Isa 13:10); because he will slay
that spirit of Antichrist that is in them (Isa 34; Rev 6:13,14).

Take things therefore more distinctly, thus: The antichristians'
spirit, is the heaven of antichristians; their sun, moon and stars,
are their superstitious ordinances; their earth is the body or
flesh of Antichrist, otherwise called the church and synagogue
of Satan. Now as the earth cannot live, and be desirable, without
the influences of the spirit of the heavens; so neither can Antichrist
live, when the Lord shall darken the light of his heaven, and shall
slay the spirit thereof. Hence you read, as I touched before, that
when his heaven shall be rolled together as a scroll, 'all the
host thereof,' unto which I compare the ordinances of Antichrist,
'shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as
a falling fig from the fig-tree' (Isa 34:4). But how, or why doth
the leaf, or the fig fall from the tree? Why, because the spirit,
or sap of the tree, is gone from them.

Therefore, the first and chief proceeding of the Lord with the man
of sin, is to slay his soul, that his body may also be consumed:
And when the spirit of Antichrist shall be made to leave both the
body and ordinances of Antichrist, 'twill be easy to deal both
with the one and the other. And first, for the ordinances of
Antichrist; because the spirit of error is in them, as well as in
the body itself. When that spirit, as I said, has left them, they
will of themselves even moulder away, and not be: As we have seen
by experience here in England, as others also have seen in other
countries. For as concerning his masses, prayers for the dead,
images, pilgrimages, monkish vows, sinful fasts, and the beastly
single life of their priests, though when the spirit of Antichrist
was in them, they did bear some sway in the world; yet now, of
what esteem are they? or who has reverence for them? They are now
blown together under hedges, as the dry leaves, for the mice and
frogs to harbour in: yea, the locusts too, camp in the hedges
among the dry leaves, in the cold day, and 'when the sun ariseth
they flee away' (Nahum 3:15-17). When 'tis a cold day for them in
a nation, then they lurk in the hedges, though their ordinances
lie there, as leaves that are dry, and fallen down from the tree;
but when the sun ariseth, and waxeth warm, they abide not, but
betake them to their wings, and fly away. But one would think that
fallen leaves should have no great nourishment in them: True, if
you have respect to men, but with vermin any thing will do: We
speak then of them with reference to men, not with respect to the
very members of Antichrist: And I say, as to them, when the spirit
of Antichrist is gone out of these ordinances, they will be with
them as dry leaves that no body seeketh after. The ordinances
therefore of Antichrist are not able to bear up themselves in
the world, as the ordinances of the Lord Jesus are, for even the
ordinances of Christ, where the spirit of Christ is not, are yet
in some esteem with men: But THESE, when the spirit of delusion
has left them, are abhorred, both skin and bones: For in themselves
they are without any sense, or rationality (Eze 20:25,26); yea,
they look as parts of things which are used to conjure up devils
with: These were prefigured by the ordinances that were NOT
good, and by the judgments whereby one should not live. For what
is there, or can there be of the least dram of truth or profit in
the things that are without the word, that being the only stamp
by which one is distinguished from the other? I say, What is there
in any of them, to the man whose eyes are open, but delusion and
deceit! Wherefore, as has been expressed already, when the Lord
Christ, by the spirit of his mouth, &c. shall drive this mystery
of iniquity from them, and strip them of that spirit of delusion
that now by its craft puts bewitching excellency upon them, they
will of themselves become such stinking rivers, ponds and pools,
that flesh and blood will loathe to drink of them; yea, as it was
with the ponds and pools of Egypt, they will be fit for nought
but to breed and hatch up frogs in.

Wherefore these ordinances shall be rejected, not one of them shall
find favour with men on earth; when the Lord, 'by the spirit of
his mouth, and the brightness of his coming,' shall have separated
their spirit from them.

Now, by ordinances of Antichrist, I do not intend things that only
respect matters of worship in Antichrist's kingdom, but those civil
laws that impose and enforce them also; yea, that enforce THAT
worship with pains and penalties, as in the Spanish inquisition:
For these must, as the other, be overthrown by Christ, by the
spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming: For these
laws, as the other, took their being, and have their soul and
life by the spirit of Antichrist; yea, as long as there is life
in them, 'tis because the spirit of that man of sin yet remaineth
in them. Wherefore, these are also great ordinances, though of
another nature than those mentioned before: Great, I say, are they;
forasmuch as neither the church of Antichrist, nor his instruments
of worship, can either live or stand without them. Wherefore, it
was admitted to the image of the beast, not only to speak, but to
cause. To speak out his laws of worship, 'and cause that as many
as would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed'
(Rev 13:15). And mark, This is because that the life that was
communicated to the image of the beast, was by him also communicated
to his word and authority. Wherefore, these laws must not be
separated from those in which the spirit of Antichrist is; yea,
they are the very pillars and sinews by which antichristianism
remains: And were these dis-spirited, the whole building would
quickly become a ruinous heap.

What could the king of Babylon's golden image have done, had it
not been for the burning fiery furnace that stood within view of
the worshippers? (Dan 3). Yea, what could that horrible command,
to pray, for thirty days, to neither God nor man, but to the king,
have done, had it not been for the dark den, and the roaring lions
there in readiness to devour those that disobeyed it? (Dan 6). As
therefore the burning fiery furnace, and the den of lions, were
the support of the horrible religion of the Babylonians of old; so
popish edicts are the support of the religion of Antichrist now;
and as long as there is spirit, that is, authority, in them, they
are like to those now mentioned; the spirit of such laws is that
that makes them dreadful: For as the furnace would have been next
to nothing, if void of fire; and the den as little frightful, if
destitute of lions; so these laws will be as insignificant, when
Christ has slain that spirit that is in them; that spirit that
causes that as many as will not worship the image of the beast,
should be killed.

Nor can any sword reach that life of Antichrist that is in these,
but the sword of Christ's mouth: Therefore, as all the religious
rites and ceremonies of Antichrist are overthrown by his spirit
working in his, as Christians; so those antichristian laws will
have their soul and their life taken from them also by this spirit
of his mouth working in some of his, as magistrates, and no otherwise;
for before kings and princes, &c. come to be enlightened about the
evils that are in such edicts, by the spirit of the living God,
they will let this image of the beast both speak and cause, &c.
But when they shall see, they will say, let it be decreed that
this prop of Antichrist be taken down. It was decreed by Darius,
that they that prayed, for thirty days, to any God but him, should
be cast into the den of lions (Dan 6:9); but this was before he
saw; but when he came to see, then he decreed again; a decree that
quite took away the power of that which he had decreed before (Dan
6:26).

Nor are we without instances of this kind nearer home: who is now
afraid of the act for burning of those that papists call heretics,
since by the king and parliament, as by the finger of God, the
life and soul is taken out of it. I bring this to shew you, that
as there is life in wicked antichristian penal laws, as well as
in those that are superstitiously religious; so the life of these,
of all these, must be destroyed by the same spirit working in
those that are Christ's, though in a diverse way.

Nor will the life of these sinews, as I have called them, be
taken away; but as God shall enlighten men to see the abominable
filthiness of that which is antichristian worship: as would easily
be made appear, if some that dwell in those countries where the
beast and his image have been worshiped, would but take the pains
to inquire into antiquity about it. As the noble king, king Henry
VIII did cast down the antichristian worship; so he cast down the
laws that held it up: so also did the good king Edward his son.
The brave queen, queen Elizabeth also, the sister to king Edward,
hath left of things of this nature, to her lasting fame behind
her. And if one such law of Antichrist hath escaped the hand of
one, another hath taken it, and done that execution on it that
their zeal and piety prompted them to.

There is yet another thing that the spirit of Antichrist is
immediately concerned in; and that is, the antichristian names
of the men that worship the beast: the names, I mean, that the
Antichrist hath baptized them into: for those names are breathed
upon them by the very spirit of Antichrist; and are such as
are absolutely names of blasphemy, or such as do closely border
thereupon; some such as Elihu durst not for his life give unto
men, only he calls them 'flattering titles' (Job 32:21,22). Now
therefore, of the danger (though not of the names themselves) you
read sufficiently in the scripture; and perhaps the Holy Ghost
has contented himself with giving of items that are general, that
men might, as to them, be the more cautious of what names they
give one to another (Rev 17:5); but this is clear, they are worn
by men of spiritual employ: but since they are but mentioned, and
are not distinctly nominated, how should we know which are they,
and which not? Verily, by searching the word of God, and by seeing
by that what names we are allowed to give unto men, with reference
to their offices, dignities, and places: for God has a quarrel with
the names, as well as with the persons that wear them; and when
his Son shall down with Antichrist, he will slay seven thousand
names of men, as well as the persons of the worshippers of the
beast (Rev 11:13).

But there are things, as well as men (Job 22:28); and these also have
been baptized into those names by the very spirit of Antichrist,
and must be destroyed by Christ, the spirit of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming: 'The idols he shall utterly abolish' (Isa
2:18); and there are men that are idols as well as things (Zech
11:17): wherefore, let men have a care, as to shun the worship of
idols, so that they bare not the name, or stand in the place of
one: and the reason of this caution is, because name and thing
are both abominable unto God.

To give you the number of these names that the spirit of Antichrist
has baptized men into, (besides the things that do also wear such
blasphemies upon them,) would be a task too great for me, and too
wearisome for you. It shall satisfy then, that I give you notice
that there are such things and men and names; and that I put you
upon search to find out what they be. But whatsoever of the spirit,
or soul, or life of Antichrist is in these names, men, or things,
must be consumed by Christ, by the spirit of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming.5

Another thing that I would touch upon is this; to wit, The lying
legends, and false miracles that Antichrist cries up: These, by
the means of which such as dwell upon the earth are deceived, and
made to adore and worship the beast: these have their life and soul
(as had those mentioned before) from the spirit of wickedness;
and must be destroyed as they, namely, by Christ, the spirit of
his mouth, and the brightness of his coming: for these are not of
the body of Antichrist, but rather such implements, or whatever
you will call them, by which the spirit and soul of Antichrist
is conveyed into, and kept also alive in the body of Antichrist,
which is the church and synagogue of Satan; you may call them
organs and means by which that wicked worketh in the mysteries of
iniquity, for the begetting of, and maintaining a lying and false
belief of the religion of the beast: nor can it be thought, but
that, as the antichristian statists6 of Antichrist, mentioned
before, do put a dread and fear upon men that are worshippers
of the beast, and his image, to the holding of them still to his
service; so these legends and miracles do, on the other hand,
abridge and bind their consciences to that worship; but all because
of that spirit of Antichrist that is in them.7

So then, here is the spirit of Antichrist diffusing itself into all
the things pertaining to the kingdom of the beast; for it dwells
in the body of Antichrist; it dwells in the matters and things
of worship of Antichrist; it dwells in the titles and names that
are antichristian; and it dwells in the laws, legends and miracles
of Antichrist. And as it is the spirit of Antichrist, so it must
be destroyed; not by sword, nor by bow, but by Christ, as fighting
against it with the spirit of his mouth, and as conquering of it
by the brightness of his coming.

THE BODY OF ANTICHRIST DESTROYED, AND HOW.

We come now to discourse of the body or flesh of Antichrist, and
of the destruction of that; for that must be destroyed also. Now
the body of Antichrist, is that church or synagogue in which the
spirit of Antichrist dwells, or unto which the spirit of Antichrist
is become a soul and life.

And this is to be destroyed, either as it is a body mystical, or
under the more gross consideration.

First, As it is a body mystical, and so it is to be destroyed
absolutely.

Secondly, As it is to be considered more grossly, and so it is to
be destroyed conditionally. That is, if repentance doth not save
the men that have gone to the making up of this body, and to the
rejoicing in it.

As she is a body mystical, so she is to be destroyed the same way
that the things of Antichrist, of which we discoursed before, were
to be destroyed; to wit, by Christ, the spirit of his mouth, and
the brightness of his coming.

This then is the sum, as to this: That the church of Antichrist,
as a church, shall be destroyed by the word and spirit of Christ.
Nor can anything in heaven prevent it, because the strong God
has decreed it: 'and a mighty angel took up a stone, like a great
mill-stone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence
shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found
no more at all' (Rev 18:21). This city, Babylon, is here sometimes
considered in the whole, and sometimes as to the parts of it;
but always, whether in whole, or in part, as some, or else as the
whole of the antichristian church; and as such, it must not be
destroyed, but by the means aforesaid. By which means her witchcrafts,
spiritual whoredoms, spiritual murders, thefts, and blasphemies,
shall be so detected and made manifest, so laid open, and so
discovered, that the nations shall abhor her, flee from her, and
buy her merchandise no more (Rev 18:11). Hence her tempting things
rot, and moulder away; for these will not keep, they are things
not lasting, but that perish in the using: what then will they
do when they are laid by? Therefore it follows, 'All things which
were [thy] dainty and goodly [ones] are departed from thee, and
thou shalt find them no more at all' (Rev 18:14). Now, if when
she had things to trade with, her dealers left her; how shall she
think of a trade, when she has nothing to traffic with? Her things
are slain, and stink already, by the weapons that are made mention
of before; what then will her carcase do? It follows then, that
as to her church-state, she must of necessity tumble: wherefore,
from Revelation 18:22 to 24, you have the manner of her total ruin
as a church, and something of the cause thereof.

But as she must, with reference to her body, be considered
mystically as a church; so also she must be considered as a body
of men, (this is that which I called more grossly,) and as such,
against whom the wrath of God will burn, and against whom, if
repentance prevent not, he will have indignation for ever. These,
I saw are them; to wit, as they are the body of the people, that
have been seduced by this spirit of Antichrist, that have been
made use of to do all the mischiefs that have been done both to
true religion, and to the professors of it, for this many hundred
years, wherefore these must not escape. Wherefore you find, that
after Antichrist, as to the spirit and mystery of Antichrist, is
slain, that the body of Antichrist, or the heap of people that
became her vassals, come next to be dealt withal.

Therefore, the angel that standeth in the sun, makes a proclamation
to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, to gather
themselves, and to come unto the supper of the great God; that
they may eat the flesh of the several sorts of the men that have
been the lovers, the countenancers, the upholders and defenders of
her antichristian state, worship, and falsehoods (Rev 19:17,18):
for abundance of their hearts shall be hardened, and made yet more
obdurate, that they may be destroyed for the wickedness that they
have done.

Wherefore, you find (as did the enemies of the church of old,)
that they might revenge themselves for the loss of their idol, or
antichristian state, begin a new war with the king, whose name
is the Lord of hosts: 'And I saw the beast, and the kings of the
earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him
that sat on the horse, and against his army' (Rev 19:19).

Their implacable malice remained when their church-state was gone;
wherefore they will now at last make another attempt upon the men
that had been the instruments in Christ's hand to torment them
that dwelt on the earth; of which more hereafter.

Now therefore is the last stroke of the batter,8 with reference to
the destroying of the body of Antichrist; only the head of this
monster remains, and that is SATAN himself: wherefore, the next
news that we hear, is, that he is taken also: 'And I saw an angel
come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a
great chain in his hand. and he laid hold on the Dragon, that old
serpent, which is the devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand
years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and
set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more,
till the thousand years should be fulfilled,' &c. (Rev 20:1-3).

BRAVE DAYS WHEN ANTICHRIST IS DEAD.

Now therefore there will be nothing of Antichrist to be seen
throughout the nations, but ruinous heaps, and desolate places. It
is said of the army of the man of sin, when he came into the land
of God's people, though it was before him 'as the garden of Eden,'
yet behind him 'twould be as 'a desolate wilderness' (Joel 2:3);
such ruins would he make of the flock of God, and of all their
ordinances, and heavenly dainties. But when the days that I have
spoken of, shall come, it will be to him a time of retaliation:
for it shall then be done unto Antichrist, as he hath done to the
church of God: As he hath made women childless, so shall he be
made childless; as he has made Zion sit upon the ground, so now
must this wicked one come down and sit in the dust; yea, as he
has made many churches desolations, so now shall he be also made
a desolation. Wherefore, whoso will find his body, they must look
for it in the side of the pit's mouth; and whoso will find his
friends and companions, they must look for them there likewise.
'They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her
multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised,
slain by the sword: though their terror was caused in the land
of the living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go
down to the pit, he is put in the midst of them that be slain.
There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude:--There is Edom,
her kind, and all her princes, &c.--There be the princes of the
north, all of them,--which--with their--might' are laid with them
that are 'slain by the sword, and bare their shame with them that
go down to the pit' (Eze 32:25-30). For 'as Babylon hath caused
the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain
of all the earth' (Jer 51:49). The margin reads it thus: Both
Babylon is to fall, O ye slain of Israel! And with Babylon the
slain of all the earth. Now then she is gone down, when all these
things shall be fulfilled; and what remains now, but to talk of
her, as folk used to do of them that are dead: for the day will
come that the church of God shall have no more of Antichrist,
Babylon, or the mother of harlots, than only the remembrance of
her; to wit, that there was such an enemy of God in the world; that
there was such a superstitious, idolatrous, bloody people in the
world. Wherefore the people that shall be born, that shall live
to serve God in these happy days, they shall see Antichrist only
in its ruins; they shall, like the sparrows, the little robins,
and the wren, sit and sing, and chirrup one to another, while
their eyes behold this dead hawk. 'Here [shall they say] did once
the lion dwell; and there was once a dragon inhabited: here did
they live that were the murderers of the saints; and there another,
that did used to set his throat against the heavens; but now in
the places where these ravenous creatures lay, grows grass, with
reeds and rushes (Isa 35:7), [or else, now their habitation is
cursed, nettles grow, and so do thorns and brambles, where their
palaces were wont to be]. And as no good was with them while they
lived, so their name stinketh now they are dead: yea, as they
wrought mischiefs, and lived like the wild beasts when they enjoyed
their abundance; so now the wild beasts of the desert, yea, they
of the desert, shall meet with the wild beasts of the island: and
the satyr shall cry to his fellows. Their houses shall be full
of doleful creatures, even as devils and wicked spirits do haunt
the desolate houses of the wicked, when they are dead' (Isa 34).
'And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees
excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent
there: neither shall the shepherds make their folds there' (Isa
13:19,20). A while after this, as was hinted before, the Christians
will begin with detestation to ask what Antichrist was? Where
Antichrist dwelt? Who were his members? And, What he did in the
world? and it shall be answered by them that shall have skill
to consider his features by the word, by way of taunt and scorn,
'Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake
kingdoms; that made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the
cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners? All
the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every
one in his own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave like an
abominable branch; and as the raiment of those that are slain,
thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the
pit, as a carcase trodden under feet' (Isa 14:16-19).

There will be a strange alteration when Antichrist is dead, and that
both in the church, and in the world. The church and the members
of it then, shall wear the name of their God in their foreheads;
that is, they shall be bold in the profession of their king, and
their God; yea, it shall be their glory to be godly; and carnal
men shall praise them for it: the praise of the whole earth shall
the church of God be in those days.

Then there shall no more be a Canaanite in the house of the Lord:
no lion shall be there; the unclean shall no more tread in the
paths of God's people, but the ransomed of the Lord shall walk
there.

Glory that has not been seen nor heard of by the people that used
to walk in sackcloth, shall now be set in the land of the living.
For as it was said of Christ, with reference to his day; so it
shall be said of saints, with reference to this day: many kings
and righteous men have desired to see the things that will be seen
then, and shall not see them: but without all doubt, the men that
shall be born at this time, will consider that these glories, and
liberties, and privileges of theirs, cost the people that walked in
the king of Babylon's fiery furnace, or that suffered the trials,
troubles and tyranny of the antichristian generation, more groans
and hearty wishes, than they did them that shall enjoy them. Thus
then it will go; the afflicted prayed for them, and the possessors
bless God for the enjoyment of them.

Oh! now shall the church walk in the light of the Lord, and sit
every man under his vine, and under his fig-tree, and none shall
make him afraid!

'For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel,
and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined
with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. And the
people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and the
house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for
servants and handmaids: And they shall take them captives, whose
captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors. And
it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give thee
rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage
wherein thou wast made to serve, that thou shalt take up this
proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor
ceased! the golden city, (or the exactress of gold) ceased! The
Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, and the sceptre of the
rulers. He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke,
he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none
hindereth. The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break
forth into singing. Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the
cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no seller is
come up against us' (Isa 14:1-8).

Also the world will now be (as it were) another thing than it was
in the days of Antichrist: now will kings, and princes, and nobles,
and the whole commonality be rid of that servitude and bondage
which in former times (when they used to carry Bell and the dragon
upon their shoulders) they were subjected to. They were then
a burden to them, but now they are at ease. 'Tis with the world,
that are the slaves of Antichrist now, as it is with them that are
slaves and captives to a whore: they must come when she calls, run
when she bids, fight with and beat them that she saith miscall her,
and spend what they can get by labour or fraud upon her, or she
will be no more their whore, and they shall be no more her bosom
ones. But now! Now it will be otherwise! Now they will have no whore
to please! Now they will have none to put them upon persecuting
of the saints! Now they shall not be made, as before, guilty of
the blood of those against whom this gentleman shall take a pet!
Now the world shall return and discern between the righteous and
the wicked; yea, they shall cleave to, and countenance the people
of God, being persuaded, as Laban was of Jacob, that the Lord will
bless them for his people's sakes: for at this day, 'the remnant of
Jacob shall be [among the Gentiles] in the midst of many people,
as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth
not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men' (Micah 5:7).

Also in these days men shall come flocking into the house of God,
both kings and princes, and nobles, and the common people, as the
doves do to their windows: and for that cause it is spoken to the
church, with reference to the latter days, saying, 'Enlarge the
place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy
habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy
stakes; for thou shalt break forth on the right hand, and on the
left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate
cities to be inhabited' (Isa 54:2,3).

Now will be broken up those prophecies and promises that to this
day lie as under lock and key, and that cannot be opened until
they be fulfilled. Now will the Spirit of God be poured forth
abundantly; and our rivers shall be in high places, that is, shall
break forth from the hearts of great ones; yea, then shall our
waters be made deep: 'And I will cause their rivers to run like
oil, saith the Lord God' (Eze 32:14). Then shall the differences,
the divisions and debates that are among the godly, cease: for
men 'shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion'
(Isa 52:8): yea, the watchmen of God's people shall do so; for it
is for want of light in them, that the lambs have so butted one
another.

Now the church of God shall read with great plainness the depths
of providence, and the turnings and windings of all God's dark and
intricate dispensations, through which she hath waded in the cloudy
and dark day: now, I say, they shall see there was an harmony in
them; and that if one of them had been wanting, the work and way
of her deliverance could not have been so full of the wisdom,
and justice, and goodness of God; Wherefore now will that song be
sung with clearer notes than ever: 'Great and marvellous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou king
of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?
for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship
before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest' (Rev 15:3,4).
And again, 'For true and righteous are his judgments: For he
hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her
hand' (Rev 19:2).

OF THE MANNER OF THE RUIN OF ANTICHRIST.

What Antichrist is, I have told you; and that as to his soul and
body. I have also told you where, or in what things the spirit
and life of Antichrist lieth, and how he shall reign for a time.
I have moreover shewed you that he shall be destroyed, and by
what, and that with reference both to his soul and body. Wherefore,
waving other things, I shall here only present you with a few short
hints concerning the manner of his downfall.

There is the downfall, the time of the downfall, and the manner
of the downfall of Antichrist.

The manner of the downfall of Antichrist, may be considered, either
with respect to the suddenness, unexpectedness, terribleness, or
strangeness thereof. It may also be considered with respect to the
way of God's procedure with her, as to the gradualness thereof.
As to the suddenness thereof, 'tis said to be in an hour. It is
also to be, when by her unexpected; for then she saith, 'I sit
a queen' (Rev 18:7,8). For the terribleness of it, The nations
shall shake at the sound of her fall (Eze 31:16,17). And for the
strangeness thereof, it shall be to the wonder of the world (Isa
14:12), it will be as when God overthrew Sodom.

But I shall not enlarge upon this method in my discourse, but
shall shew you the manner of the ruin of Antichrist, with respect
to the gradualness thereof (Eze 16:36-43; Rev 18:8; Isa 47:9).

Antichrist then shall be brought to ruin gradually; that is, by
degrees: A part after a part; here a fenced city, and there a high
tower, even until she is made to lie even with the ground. And yet
all shall be within the compass of God's days, hours, or moments;
for within the compass of these limited times Antichrist shall be
destroyed.9

Now, (as I said) He, she, Sodom, Egypt, Babylon, Antichrist, shall
be destroyed, not all at once, after the way of our counting of
time; but by step after step, piece after piece. And perhaps there
may be in the words now following, something that signifies this:
They shall 'shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one
end' (Jer 51:31). This is also shewed by the vessels in which is
contained the wrath of God for her, together with the manner of
pouring of it out. The vessels in which it is contained are called
VIALS; Now a vial is that which letteth out what is contained in
it by degrees, and not all at once.

There are also two things to be considered, as to the manner of
its being poured out of them. The first respecteth the nature of
the vial. The other, the order of the angels that poured forth this
wrath.

For the First: The vial, as it letteth out what is in it by degrees;
so it doth it with certain gusts, that are mixed with strength and
violence, bolting it out with noise, &c.

As for the order of the angels, or that order that they observe,
they plainly shew that this enemy must come down by degrees; for
that these vials are by them poured out one after another, each one
working something of their own effects, before another is poured
forth. The first is poured forth upon the antichristian earth: The
second, upon her sea: The third is poured forth upon her rivers:
And the fourth, upon her sun: The fifth is poured forth upon the
seat of the beast: The sixth, upon her Euphrates: And the seventh,
into her air (Rev 16:2-17). And, I say, they are poured forth
not all at one time, but now one, and then another. Now, since by
these vials Antichrist must fall; and since also they are poured
forth successively: 'Tis evident that this man of sin, this son
of perdition, is to fall and die by degrees. He would not die at
all, as is manifest by his wrestling with it; but he is a strong
God that judges, and therefore he must come down: His friends
also, with what cordials they can, will labour to lengthen out his
tranquility; but God hath set his bounds, and he cannot go beyond
the time appointed.

We must also put a difference betwixt her being fought withal and
wounded, and that of her dying the death. Michael and his angels
have been holding of her in play a long season; but yet she is
not dead (Rev 12): But, as I said, she shall descend in battle
and perish, and shall be found no more for ever.

A TENTH PART FALLS FIRST.

To speak then to the manner of the ruin of this Antichrist, with
respect to the gradualness thereof: It must piece after piece be
overthrown, until at last every whit thereof is rolled down from
the rocks as a burnt mountain.

And hence we read that this city falls first in a tenth part
thereof, even while nine parts remain yet standing: Nor doth this
tenth part, notwithstanding the faith and faithful testimony of the
two witnesses, quite fall, until they are slain, and also raised
again: For 'tis said, The same hour that the witnesses were raised,
the tenth part of the city fell (Rev 11:13): The tenth part of
that city that reigneth over the kings of the earth, which city
is Sodom, Egypt, Babylon, or the great whore (Rev 17:18).

By the city then, I understand the church of Antichrist in its
utmost bounds; and so it reacheth as far as the beast with seven
heads and ten horns hath dominion. Hence this city is also called
cities, as one universe is called by the name of several countries,
&c. And them cities also are called 'the cities of the nations'
(Rev 16:19): For as when they are put together, they all make but
one; so when they are considered apart, they are found in number
ten, and answer to the ten horns upon the heads of the (seven
headed) beast that carries her, and do give her protection.

This then I take to be the meaning: That the antichristian church
is divided into ten parts, and each part is put under one of the
horns of the beast for protection: But that aid and protection
shall not help, when God shall come to execute judgment upon her:
For it saith, 'A tenth part of the city fell'; that is, first, and
as a forerunner of the fall of all the rest: Now where this tenth
part is, or which of the ten parts must fall first, or whether
indeed a tenth part is already fallen, that I will leave to those
that are wiser than myself to determine.

But since I am speaking of the fall of a tenth part of Antichrist;
a word or two about the means of the fall thereof.

The means of the fall of this tenth part, is an earthquake; yet
not such as is universal, over the face of all, but an earthquake
in that tenth part where that city stood that should fall. Now
by earthquakes here, cannot be meant any thing but such a shaking
as unsettleth the foundations of this tenth part: But whether it
shall be in this tenth part as a city, or in it as a state, that
I shall not determine; only my thoughts are, That it shall be
an earthquake in that kingdom where this tenth part shall happen
to be: An earthquake not to overthrow further than is appointed;
and that is the city which is called the tenth part of the great
Antichrist. So far as that state is a state, so far then it is
shaken for reformation, not for destruction; for in the earthquake
were slain seven thousand (names of) men; and the remnant were
affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. But thus much for
the first: Great Babylon falleth first, in a tenth part of it.

THE NINE PARTS FALL.

Again, The next step that the strong God taketh towards the utter
overthrow of Antichrist, will be more sore upon the whole, though
not at first universal neither, yet in conclusion, it shall throw
down the nine parts that are left: For thus it is recorded: 'And
the cities of the nations fell': The cities of the nations, the
antichristian churches, otherwise called the daughters of the
mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth.

Now to shew you the hand of God in this second stroke, wherewith
the Lord will smite this enemy. 1. Here we have a great earthquake.

2. And then, The fall of the cities of the nations.

For the earthquake, it is said to be such as never was, 'so mighty
an earthquake, and so great' (Rev 16:18); for it extended itself
as far as the other nine cities had any ground to stand on; for
it shook the foundations of them all.

The fall of the cities, was not immediately upon the shake that was
made, but the earthquake produced an eruption, an eruption in the
nine remaining parts of this city: And such an eruption as is of
the worser sort, for it divided them into a three-headed division:
'And the great city was divided into three parts': the great city,
to wit, the powers by which they were upheld. The meaning then is
this; when God shall strike this man of sin the second time, he
will not be so sparing as he was at first, when he struck but a
tenth part to the ground; but now he will so shake, so confound,
so divide, so raise up Antichrist against himself, to wit, in the
body and members of him, that they shall set to fighting, and to
tearing one another in pieces, until they have consumed the whole
of these nine parts. It was, saith the text, divided into three
parts, which divisions are the worst of all: It will be therefore
such a division as will bring them all to ruin. Hence it follows,
'And the cities of the nations fell.'

Wherefore, this three-cornered eruption will be the most dreadful
to Antichrist that ever was: It will be like that that was in
Jerusalem when she came to be laid even with the ground; and like
that that came upon the armies of the Gentiles, when they came up
to fight against Jehoshaphat.

'For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants
of Mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: And when they
had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to
destroy another' (2 Chron 20:23). This, I say, is the division
that this mighty earthquake shall make betwixt the horns that are
left to these nine parts that remained, when the tenth part of
the city fell. And this will come to pass through the increase of
the heat of God's anger: For he is angry with the waters where
the woman sitteth, because they have delivered up his beloved to
the bloody whore; wherefore, he now will give them blood to drink
in fury.

Hence his beginning to deal with Antichrist, is called, the
beginning of revenges: 'I will make [saith God] mine arrows drunk
with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that with the blood
of the slain and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges
upon the enemy' (Deu 32:42). And therefore it is said again, that
when God comes to do this work upon this Antichrist, it is because
'it is the day of the Lord's vengeance, and the year of recompences
for the controversy of Zion' (Isa 34:8). 'For the day of vengeance
is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come' (Isa 63:4).

A peace therefore cannot be made among these cities when God has
forbidden it: Wherefore the effect of all, is, The cities of the
nations fall. There is therefore like to be no more good days
for Antichrist after this earthquake has begun to shake her: No,
nothing now is to be expected of her, but rumours, tumults, stirs,
and uproars: 'One post shall run to meet another,--to shew the
king of Babylon that his city is taken at one end': And again, 'A
rumour shall both come one year; and after that in another year
shall come a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler against
ruler,' &c. (Jer 51:31,46). So that this earthquake has driven
away peace, shaken the foundations, and will cast the nine cities
down to the ground.

GREAT BABEL FALLS.

And this is a second stroke that God will give this man of sin,
and a third cometh quickly. Wherefore it follows upon the downfall
of these cities of the nations, that 'great Babylon came into
remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of
the fierceness of his wrath.' Now then, have at great Babylon.
Great Babylon! What is that? Why, I take it to be the mother, the
metropolitan, the great whore herself: For though sometimes, by
the great whore, or great Babylon, we may understand, the church
of Antichrist in general; yet by it is meant more properly, the
mother of the daughters, of whose overthrow we have spoken before.
We are now then come to the threshold of the door of the house of
the OLD one; to the door of the mother of harlots, and abomination
of the earth. This then that but now is said to come into remembrance
with God, is that which gave being to the cities destroyed before;
to wit, the mistress, the queen, the mother-church, as she calleth
herself.

And this is the wisdom of God concerning her, that she should not
be the first that should die; but that she should live to see the
destruction of her daughters, and pine away under the sight and
sense of that, even until judgment also shall overtake herself.

Thus Pharaoh and his chief ones did live to see the greatest part
of Egypt destroyed before judgment overtook them, but at last it
came to their doors also.

Zedekiah lived to see his children slain before his face, before
judgment overtook him to his own personal destruction (Jer 52:8-11).

Babylon also, when God sent the cup of his fury unto her, yet was
to live to see the nations drink before her: 'Take the wine cup
of my fury [said God to the prophet,] and cause all the nations
to whom I send thee, to drink it' (Jer 25:15). To wit, All the
kingdoms of the world which are upon the face of the earth. 'And
Sheshach shall drink after them' (verse 26). But what was Sheshach?
may some say. I answer, It was Babylon, the princess of the world,
and at that time the head of all those nations (Dan 4:22), (as this
queen is now the mother of harlots). Wherefore, the same prophet,
speaking of the destruction of the same Sheshach, saith, 'How is
Sheshach taken? and how is the praise of the whole earth surprised!
How is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!' (Jer
51:41).

Now, if this was the method of God's proceeding with his enemies
in the way of his judgments of old, why may we not suppose that
he will go the same way with his great enemy now: especially since
those judgments mentioned before, were executed upon those, which,
in some things, were figures of the great whore. Besides, we read
here plainly, that when the cities of the nations were fallen,
great Babylon came into remembrance before God, to give her to
drink of the cup.

From all which I conclude, as I did before, that the mother, the
metropolitan, the lady of kingdoms, shall live to see her daughters
executed before her face: After which she shall come into
consideration herself; for she must assuredly drink of the cup.10

This destruction therefore must be last, for the reasons urged
before, and also because she most deserves the bottom of the cup.
The bottom is the dregs, the most bitter part, and that where the
most heat, and fiercest wrath of God doth lie (Psa 75:8): Wherefore,
although you find that by the first earthquake a great slaughter
was made, and that a tenth part of the city fell; yet from
that judgment some did escape: 'And the remnant were affrighted,
and gave glory to the God of heaven' (Rev 11:13). But now, this
earthquake, by virtue of which the cities of the nations fall,
and as an effect of which great Babylon is come into 'remembrance
before God,' neither spares one of the daughters of this whore,
nor any man that is a lover of them; but it so is seconded by a
'hail-storm,' and that hail-storm worketh so in wrath, that not
one escapes by repentance. Every hail-stone was the weight of a
talent, which some say is six pounds above half an hundred weight:11By
this therefore God shews, that now his anger was wrought up to the
height. I know not wherewith so to compare these hail-stones, as
with the talent of lead that was laid over the mouth of the ephah,
which was prepared to hold the woman, whose name was wickedness,
this very whore of Babylon: For that talent of lead was to keep
down this mistress, that she might get no more out of the ephah,
and these hail-stone are to banish her out of the world (Zech
5:5-11): Therefore it follows, that she must have the most heavy
judgment, even the bottom of the cup.

'And great Babylon came into remembrance before God.' To remember
with God, is to visit either with grace or wrath, God is said to
remember Rachel, when he visited her with the blessing of a fruitful
womb (Gen 30:22). It is said also that God remembered Noah, when
the time came on that he was to be delivered from the flood (Gen
8:1). Here also he is said to remember Babylon, that is, to visit
her with his anger for the wickedness that she had committed: 'To
give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.'

Now then is the time of iniquity, when it will be come to the full;
and now also is the time of God's anger, when it will be come to
the full: Now therefore must the murders (Rev 18:24), and thefts,
and blasphemies, and fornications, &c., belonging to this mother
of harlots, be recompensed to the full, to wit, with the dregs of
this cup: Yet since the hail-stones come by weight, and the wrath
comes by measure, (for so a talent and a cup imports) it follows,
that the Almighty God, even in the midst of the heat of all this
anger, will keep to the rules of justice and judgment while he is
dealing with this enemy: He has not passions, to carry him beyond
rules of judgment; nor weakness, to cause him to fall short of
doing justice: Therefore he has (as was said) his judgments for
her by weight, and his indignation by measure: But yet this weight
and measure is not suited to her constitution, not with an intent
to purge or refine her; but it is disposed according to the measure
and nature of her iniquity, and comes to sweep her, as with the
besom of destruction, until she is swept off from the face of all
the earth.

And thus I have shewed you the manner of the ruin of Antichrist;
that is, That it will be gradual, part after part, until the whole
be overthrown. And this truth may be applied both to the soul, as
well as to the body of Antichrist: For the soul, spirit, or life
of Antichrist must also after this manner be destroyed. And hence
it is said to be consumed, that is, by degrees: For to consume, is
to destroy by degrees: Only this caution I would have the reader
remember, That much of the soul of Antichrist may be destroyed,
when none of her daughters are; and that the destruction of her
spirit is a certain forerunner of the destruction of her body in
the manner that we have related.

Now since she is dying, let us ring her passing-bell; for when she
is dead, we that live to see it, intend to ring out.

'For thus saith the Lord God; When I shall make thee a desolate
city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring
up the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee; when I
shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with
the people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the
earth, in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the
pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I shall set glory in the land
of the living; I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no
more: though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found
again, saith the Lord God' (Eze 26:19-21).

OF THE SIGNS OF THE APPROACH OF THE DOWNFALL OF ANTICHRIST.

Having in the foregoing discourse spoken of Antichrist his ruin,
and the manner thereof, I now come to speak of the signs of the
approach of her destruction. And whether I shall hit right, as to
these, that I must leave to time to make manifest; and in the mean
while to the wise in heart to judge.

That she shall fall, there is nothing more certain; and when she
is fallen, that she never shall rise again, is also as firmly
decreed; yea, and shewed too by him that cast the millstone into
the sea, and said, 'Thus with violence shall that great city
Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all' (Rev
18:21). This is therefore her fate and destiny, from the mouth
of the holy one; and is sealed up in the scriptures of truth, for
the comfort of the people that have been afflicted by her.

True, the time of her fall is not certainly known by the saints, nor
at all believed by her; wherefore, her plagues must come unlooked
for by her. And as to the saints, their guesses, as to the time of
her ruin, must needs be conjectural and uncertain. For her part,
she shall say, and that when she stands where she must suddenly
fall, 'I shall be a lady for ever' (Isa 47:7-9). And as to the
saints that would very willingly see her downfall, how often have
they been mistaken as to the set time thereof.

Nor have I been without thought, but that this mistake of the godly
may become a snare to Antichrist, and a trap to her upholders.
For what can be a greater judgment, or more effectually harden the
hearts of the wicked, than for them to behold that the predictions,
prophecies, expectation and hopes of their enemies (as to their
ruin) should quite (as to the time) be frustrate, and made void.

Moses prophesied, and the people hoped that God would give Israel
'the land of Canaan'; and yet the Canaanites beat them (Num 14:40;
Josh 7:5-9).

Jeremiah prophesied that the enemy should come and take the city
[of] Jerusalem; but because he came once, and went back without
doing it, how stout and hardened were the hearts of that people
against all the rest of his prophetic sayings, as to such a thing
(Jer 37). Now the error lay not in these prophets, but in the people's
mistaking the times: and if mistakes do so much harden the heart
of the wicked, what will they do to such of them who make it their
business to blind and harden their hearts against God, by abusing
all truths? Surely, when men seek to harden their hearts by
abusing of truth, they will do it to purpose, when they have also
the advantage of the weakness of their professed enemies to do
it by: especially when their enemies shall say they speak by the
word of the Lord, and time shall manifest it to be both a mistake
and a falsehood.

It is to be bewailed, namely, the forwardness of some in this
matter, who have predicted concerning the time of the downfall of
Antichrist, to the shame of them and their brethren: nor will the
wrong that such by their boldness have done to the church of God,
be ever repaired by them nor their works. But the judgments of God
are a great deep; and therefore who can tell, since the enemy of
God would not be convinced by the power of truth, and the virtuous
lives of some, but that God might leave them to be snared, hardened
and emboldened to run upon their unavoidable destruction, by the
lies and lightness of others. They begin to vaunt it already, and
to say, Where is the word of the Lord, as to this, let it come
now. But when Agag said, 'surely the bitterness of death is past,'
then was the time for him to be hewn in pieces (1 Sam 15:32,33).
I shall not therefore meddle with the times and seasons which the
Father hath put in his own power; no, though they as to Antichrist's
ruin are revealed; because by the Holy Ghost there is a challenge
made, notwithstanding the time is set, and by the word related to
the man of wisdom, to find it out if he can (Rev 13:18).

If Samson's riddle was so puzzling, what shall we think of this?
and though the angel hath intimated, that this sealed matter shall
be opened towards the time of the end (Dan 12:9); yet 'tis evident,
some have either been so hasty, or presumed too much upon their
own abilities: for I am sure they have missed the mark, hardened
the heart of the enemy, stumbled the weak, and shamed them that
loved them.

But since the most high hath irreversibly determined her downfall
also, let us see if we can have better success in discoursing upon
the signs, than others have had who have meddled with the timing
thereof.

FIRST SIGN.

First then. The downfall and ruin of Antichrist draws near, when the
church and people of God are driven from all those hiding-places
that God has prepared for them in the wilderness. The church of
God, when the dragon did his worst, had an hiding-place prepared
her of God, that she might not utterly be devoured by him; and so
shall have till the time of his end shall come.

Of this you read in the 12th of the Revelation, a place worthy to
be noted for this. But now, when the time of the ruin of Antichrist
draws on, then is the church deprived of her shelter, and laid
open, as one would think, to be utterly swallowed up for ever,
having no more place in the wilderness, that is, among the nations,
to hide herself from the face of the serpent. But how comes this
to be a SIGN of the approach of the ruin of Antichrist? why thus.
The time of this beast's war with the church of God, and the time
that the church shall have an hiding-place in the wilderness, are
both of a length, the one continuing forty-two months, the other a
thousand two hundred and threescore days. Now since the war that
this beast makes with the woman and her seed, and the woman's
hiding-place in the wilderness from his face, are, for length of
time, the same; what hindereth but that when the woman and her
seed can find no more shelter in the nations, the time that the
beast hath allotted him to make war against her, should be finished
also? when we therefore shall see that plots and conspiracies,
that designs for utter ruin, are laid against God's church all the
world over; and that none of the kings, princes, or mighty states
of the world, will open their doors, or give them a city for refuge;
then is the ruin of Antichrist at hand: for Haman's plot, though
the most universal that ever yet was hatching, (being laid in an
hundred twenty-seven provinces,) did but presage the deliverance
and exaltation of the Jews, and the hanging of Haman and his
sons: yea, and I take it, that the very day that this great enemy
had set for the utter overthrow of the church, God made the day
in which their deliverance began, and that from whence it was
completed; and I take that to be a type of this.

There is but one thing that I can think of that can give matter of
a shew of doubt about this thing; and that is, though the time of
this war against the saints, and that of the woman's shelter in the
wilderness as to length, be one and the same; yet whether they did
commence together, and begin to take their rise, as men do that
begin to run a race? a word therefore to this. I suppose they did
commence much together; for else with whom should this beast make
war, and how should the church escape? Or, if the beast began
his war before the woman began to have a hiding-place, why was she
not swallowed up, since in the wilderness was her only place of
shelter? Again, what needed the woman to have a place of shelter
in the wilderness, when there was no war made against her? And
yet this must be, if her thousand two hundred and threescore days,
began before the beast's forty-two months: but they ended both
together; for the beast could not kill the witnesses before they
had finished their testimony; which testimony of theirs lasted
this full time that the beast had granted him to make war with
them, to wit, one thousand two hundred and threescore days (Rev
11:3): therefore their times went out together, as will be made
appear, if you consider also that the witnesses were slain, by
virtue, not of the old, but of a new war levied against them; and
that, as it should seem, at the very time when her hiding-place
was taken from her; for then indeed, for a little season, will
the church of God be overcome, as I shall shew by and by.

Wherefore, let God's people consider and remember that when God's
church is absolutely forlorn, and has no hiding-place any longer
in the world, the kingdom of Antichrist will quickly begin to
tumble. Nor is this the alone place from whence we may gather
these conclusions.

The time of Pharaoh's tyranny, of his life, and of the deliverance
of the children of Israel, came out much together; as any will
discern that shall consider the history of them (Gen 15:13).

David, when Saul did sorely prosecute him, fled last into the
wilderness to Achish the king of Gath, a Philistine, for shelter;
and he gave him Ziklag for his refuge (1 Sam 27:5,6). And that
place so continued to David, 'till just about the time in which
Saul must die; and then behold, David's Ziklag is burnt with fire,
and himself stript naked of harbour! (1 Sam 30:1). But what matter!
The time of Saul's life, as well as of David's Ziklag, was now
upon expiring; for within three or four days after, David became
the king of Israel (1 Sam 31:1-6).

And thus also it was with the Babel-beast: His time expired, when
the captivity of Israel was upon the finishing: then was the time
of his land come, and 'in that' very 'night was Belshazzar the
king of the Chaldeans slain' (Dan 5:25-30).

Thus therefore it will happen to the church in the latter days:
her place of shelter in the wilderness; her Ziklag will be taken
from her, about the time that the war that the beast has to make
upon the woman and her seed shall be finished. But now the church
is not therefore immediately delivered, when her Ziklag is taken
from her; for after that, the beast levieth a new war, to the
overcoming and killing of the church: I say therefore, that this
is a sign, not of the downfall of Antichrist, but of the approach
thereof: for the church's bondage shall continue but three days,
and a little after this [shall be her deliverance]. Much like to
this was that of David; for after he had lost his Ziklag, for two
or three days he had sore distress: but lo, then came the kingdom
to him.

Indeed, sense and reason saith, it is a fearful thing for the church
of God to be exposed to the rage of her enemy all over the world
at once; and that all nations should shut up their gates, let
down their portcullises, bolt up their doors, and set open their
flood-gates to destroy them: but so will be the dispensation of
God, to the end deliverance may be the sweeter, and the enemies
fall the more headlong, and the arm of God the more manifest,
both for the one, and against the other. And in this will that
scripture be fulfilled: 'And there shall be a time of trouble,
such as never was since there was a nation--and at that time thy
people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written
in the book' (Dan 12:1).

Let us gather up what has been said again; namely, that it is a
sign of the approach of the ruin of Antichrist, when God's church
can find no more shelter in the wilderness; because when her Ziklag
is burned, the time of the war that the beast is to make against
her, is finished. Wherefore, when she hath given one desperate
struggle more, and laid the church of God, or his witnesses,
for dead, in the street of his great city, for three days and an
half, then comes the kingdom, and the long, long-looked-for rest
and glory. Wherefore it remains, that an angel should stand in
the sun, and make proclamation to all the fowls that fly in the
midst of heaven, to gather themselves together to the supper of
the great God: 'That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh
of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses,
and of them that sit on them; and the flesh of all men, both free
and bond, both small and great' (Rev 19:18). This is to be after
the forty-two months of the beast; and consequently, after the
thousand two hundred and threescore days that the church was to
be in sackcloth; yea, after the resurrection of the witnesses, as
is evident by that which follows: 'And the beast was taken, [that
is, after the second year] and with him the false prophet that
wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that
had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshiped his
image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone' (verse 20).

SECOND SIGN.

Secondly, Another sign of the approach of the ruin of Antichrist,
is this: towards the end of her reign, the nations will be made
to see her baseness, and to abhor her and her ways. They will, I
say, be made to see these things, in order to her ruin: also, when
they shall be made to see, her ruin will not be far off. For so
long as the nations and their rulers shall continue in that dead
sleep that she hath bewitched them into, by their drinking of the
wine of her fornication; so long we have no ground to think that
her ruin is at the door: but when God shall lay her before kings,
and shall discover her nakedness to the nations, then be sure her
destruction is at hand. Hence you read, that precedent to her
downfall: An angel comes down from heaven, and enlightens the earth
with his glory (Rev 10:1). [The earth;] that is, the kingdoms,
countries, and nations where the woman sitteth, or they that border
thereupon. [Enlightened;] to let them see the filthiness of the
whore. [With his glory;] with the doctrine that he had commission
to preach against her, for the discovering of her lewdness to
the earth. This also was the way that God took with backsliding
Israel of old, (and she was a type of our religious Babel) when
he intended to bring her to judgment for her sins (Eze 16:37);
and this is the way that God will take to destroy our religious
Antichrist, when he comes to deliver his people out of her hand.

For though the people that suffer at her hand, can do nothing
against her, but lay, in prayers and tears against her before the
God of heaven, and bear their witness against her before the gods
of the earth; yet when kings shall come to be concerned, and they
will count themselves concerned when they shall see how they have
been deceived by her; then let her look to it. 'Behold, I am
against thee, saith the Lord of Hosts; and I will discover thy
skirts upon thy face, and I will shew the nations thy nakedness,
and the kingdoms thy shame. And I will cast abominable filth upon
thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazing-stock.'
And what follows? 'And it shall come to pass, that all they that
look upon thee, shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid
waste: who will bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for
thee?' (Nahum 3:5-7).

Wherefore, there wants nothing but that she be discovered to the
nations and their kings; for did they but see her, though they lay
yet in her bosom, they would rise up against her, that she must
die: wherefore it is written again, I will 'bring forth a fire from
the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to
ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee'
(Eze 28:18).

The chief of the wisdom of Antichrist this day is laid out, if
perhaps by it she may cover her nakedness, and keep it from the eyes
of kings and their people. But God has said it shall not avail:
'Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen:
I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man' (Isa
47:3). But how will he make her naked? Verily, by kings. But how
shall kings do it? Why, by virtue of the glory of the angel: yea,
they 'shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh,
and burn her with fire' (Rev 17:16).

Let this, I pray, be considered, That Antichrist shall not down,
but by the hand of kings. The preacher then kills her soul, and the
king kills her body. And why should not the kings have it granted
unto them, that she should fall by their hand? the kings are those
that she has abused, that she has in the grossest manner abused,
and has served herself of them: but the time of the end of
Antichrist, mystery Babylon is coming, 'and then many nations and
great kings shall serve themselves of him' (Jer 27:7).12

Nor shall all the tricks, lies, and deceit under which formerly
she used to shroud herself, be able to prove a balm to her any
longer: No, 'in vain shalt thou use many medicines'; for no cure
shall be unto thee; 'the nations have heard of thy shame' (Jer
46:11,12).

Babylon has for a long time been 'a lady of kingdoms,' and
'a golden cup in the Lord's hand': the nations also have largely
drank of her cup, and the kings have committed fornication with her
(Rev 18:3). But now the angel is come down, and hath enlightened
the earth with his glory. Wherefore now it follows immediately,
'Babylon is fallen! is fallen!' That is, in the eyes and esteem
of the nations, as well as otherwise.

True, some of the kings will bewail her fall, and will cry, Alas!
Alas! when they see that they cannot help her; for that they shall
see, as is evident, because they stand afar off to lament her,
'afar off for the fear of her torment.' The kings therefore into
whose hands God shall deliver her, and who shall execute his
judgments upon her, shall be more mighty and powerful to bring her
down, than shall be the whole world besides to uphold her.

The Protestant Kings.

And this observe further, That as the kings that shall hate her,
shall hate her because in the light of the glory of the angel they
are made able to see her filthiness; so the kings that shall bewail
her, are such as in judgment are left in the dark, and that shall
be bewitched by her to the end. This therefore will let us see
something of the meaning of God, in that he has drawn off from
her some of the kings already; to wit, that he might train them
up by the light of the gospel, that they may be expert, like men
of war, to scale her walls, when the king of kings shall give out
the commandment to them so to do.

There has been a great deal of talk in the countries about the ruin
and destruction of Babylon; but could we see more of the kings
engaged against her, we should hope groundedly that her fall was
at the door. Well, blessed be God for what kings there are, and
the Lord turn the hearts of many more to hate her.

Some, as I said before, have adventured to foretell the time of
her downfall; but give me the signs thereof. This therefore is a
sign, a sign that her downfall approaches, when God shall lay her
nakedness before the nations, and put it into the hearts of kings
to abhor her. The signs of the times the Lord Jesus would have us
mind; and because the Jews neglected them, though as to the time
they hit pretty right, yet they missed of the thing that the time
brought forth.

THIRD SIGN.

Thirdly, A third sign of the approach of the ruin of Antichrist,
is this: 'When Babylon is become the habitation of devils, &c.,'
then the downfall thereof is upon us. True, Babylon was always an
habitation for devils; but not an habitation only for them; Israel
once dwelt there, and our Antichrist was sometimes a place of
residence for good men. The meaning then, is, When you shall see
the church and people of God so forsake her that she is left in
a manner to herself, and to her disciples, then she is to fall
quickly. When you hear it proclaimed by them that are yet in her,
of God's people, 'We would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country'
(Jer 51:9): Then she will soon be hissed out of the world: for
this is the way of the wisdom of God; namely, to bring his people
out of a city or place, when he intends the ruin of that place.
When God was about to destroy the old world, he put his Noah into
an ark: when God was about to destroy Sodom, he sent his Lot away
thence to Zoar: when Christ was about to destroy Jerusalem, he bid
his disciples flee from the midst of that: and when there shall
be by God a hissing for his people; and when they shall hear him,
and obey, and gather to him, then you shall see what will become
of this enemy of Christ: 'I will hiss for them, and gather them;
for I have redeemed them' (Zech 10:8-12).

I say therefore, when Babylon shall become the habitation of
devils, a hold for all foul spirits, and a cage for every unclean
and hateful bird, then Babylon is fallen.

And thus the angel that lightened the earth with his glory,
proclaimed, 'Babylon the great is fallen! is fallen! and is become
the habitation of devils, and a hold for every foul spirit, and a
cage for every unclean and hateful bird.' Wherefore it must be,
that by that her time is come that she should fall, God will have
gleaned his people from the midst of her. And when God shall have
gleaned his people from the midst of her, those that are left behind
will appear more than ever to be what they are, to wit, devils,
foul spirits, and hateful birds; wherefore, now will Antichrist
appear in his own most proper colours.

But to comment a little upon the words.

Babylon 'Mystery Babylon' (Rev 17:5). The antichristian church.

'Is fallen! Is fallen!' In the eyes and faith of the godly, by
her dropping into the dregs of degeneracy, and so is become the
habitation of devils, &c., in order to her falling into utter and
unavoidable destruction for ever.

'Is become.' That is, through the labour of the fanners and winnowers
that God hath sent to fan Babylon, and to fetch out his people,
that she might be left to her chaff: 'I will send [saith God to
Babylon] fanners, that shall fan her, and shall empty her land
[of good men;] for in the day of trouble they shall be against
her round about' (Jer 51:2).

'An habitation of devils.' Devils: not such by nature, but by
practice. Incarnate devils. For when the time is come that Babylon
must be destroyed, she shall be found to be an habitation for the
most vile of the sons of men. For as devils have acted towards the
world, so shall the sons of this sorceress, and this whore, act
towards Christ and his members in the latter days. And, perhaps,
the departing of Zion from the midst of her, will blow her up
into this spirit of devilism. Let God's people therefore, when
Antichrist is towards her end, look for nothing from her, but what
the devil, in times past, used to do; to wit, all sinful subtilty,
malice, wrath, fraud, deceit, lying, murder, false accusings, and
implacable madness of spirit to do them mischief. (But Lord God!
think I, what will become of good men! and where will they be safe
in such days? Only I comfort myself, by saying to myself again,
this a sign that the ruin of Antichrist is at the door.) But this
I say, he must needs be a tuneable man, that shall be able in those
days to sing this song to himself at all seasons: for this is to
drive reason backward, and to set the cart before the horse. For
what will the good man's reason say, when it seeth all Babylonians
are become devils, but that the church of God will certainly
be torn in pieces? But behold! the text and the Holy Ghost runs
counter. 'Babylon is fallen! is fallen! and [or, for it] is become
the habitation of devils.' These words for certain are the words
of an holy angel; for it could not have entered into the heart of
mere man to have conceived them.

'An habitation.' To be an habitation (for devils) is to be their
house, their dwelling-place, their place of privilege, their place
of rest and abode, or thither whither they have right to go.
And thus will Babylon be; that is, an house, an habitation, a
dwelling-place, and a place of rest, only for devilish-minded men;
thither may such men come; for such her doors stand open, and
there may such inhabit. When therefore you see good men come out
thence, and all sorts of wicked men flock in thither, then know
that Babylon is near her end.

'And a hold for every foul spirit.' Understand by spirit, either
those that are devils by nature, or such as are such otherwise.
But I think that the angel chiefly intends all manner of unclean
and filthy spirits; and so the church and members of Babylon, their
only place of safety: Or if you understand it of the uncleanness
of the spirits and minds of men, then the meaning is, that they
are called foul spirits, in allusion to those of devils which go
by the same name (Mark 9:25). But however, or which way soever
taken, it seems Babylon is their hold; that is, their place of
defence: For by an hold, we often understand a place of strength,
a castle, a fort, a tower; so that these devils, these foul-spirited
men, these Babylonians, will not only find house-room and harbour
in Babel, but shelter, defence and protection, when she is near
her ruin: yea, they will find her an upholder to them, and a
countenancer of them, in all their foul and devilish pranks; yea,
such an hold shall she be to such foul spirits in such foul acts,
that it shall not be possible that they should be driven from her,
or from them: For an hold is often taken in the scriptures for a
place that is impregnable, and must be so taken here. This intimates
then, that some faint opposition by the kings and nations will be
made against these inhabiters, foul spirits, but to little purpose,
until the time of her land shall come (Jer 27:7); for in their
hold they still will be secured and defended from what reason,
law and scripture can or would do unto them. Thus then we see how
Babel, towards her end, will be filled, and with what, to wit,
with devils and foul spirits; yea, and that she will not only be
an habitation, but a place of defence for such.

'And a cage for every unclean and hateful bird.' Those that before
are called devils, and foul spirits, are also here called 'birds,
unclean and hateful beasts.' By the term [Birds,] he may allude
to that of the prophet Isaiah, where these unclean birds are
mentioned (34:11-17) And by cage, he may allude to the prophet
Jeremiah, from whom, as I think, the Holy Ghost takes those words;
but then we must put men in the place of birds, and the Babylonian
kingdom for the cage (Jer 5:27).

'Every unclean bird.' As was said before, a hold for every foul
spirit. These unclean birds therefore are not all of one feather,
or kind, but of all and every kind; and it intimates, that the
worst act of all professions, shall be, as in a cage, in Babylon,
a little before her downfall. But I say, if they will not be all
of one feather, yet in their temper they will somewhat agree,
being either in shape, monstrous; of appetite, ravenous; or,
of inclination, lovers of the night. For of all these sorts were
the forbidden, or unclean birds among the Jews. Now since these
unclean birds are not all of one feather, or kind, it intimates
that the basest of all sorts, sects, professions and degrees, shall
take shelter in Babylon towards her end; and that they shall there,
in their temper, unanimously agree to show themselves monstrous,
to devour and eat up the poor and needy, and to blow out the light
of the gospel.

'A cage.' Not to imprison them in, but for them to sit and sing
in, to confer their notes in, to make melodious music in; I mean,
melodious to their own thinking; for the ass thinks that he sings
full favouredly, and the owl endeavours to lift up her voice above
all the birds of the wood: But it will be a prediction of her fall,
and that her ruin is at the door.

Of these birds Zephaniah speaks, when he prophecies of the downfall
of Nineveh, saying, 'The cormorant and the bittern [shall] lodge in
the uppermost lintels of it, their voice shall sing in the windows;
[when] desolation shall be in the thresholds' (Zeph 2:14). An
unseasonable time to sing in; for when death is coming in at the
door, mourning should be in the chambers. But this is the judgment
of God, That she should be a cage for every unclean bird to sing
in, even then when her destruction and desolation cometh upon her.

To sing, as in a cage, doth also denote security, and that the
heart is far from fear; for she saith, 'I shall see no sorrow, in
that hour in which her judgment comes.'

But is this a sign of the approach of the ruin of Antichrist? And
must those that shall live to see those days, rejoice when these
things begin to come to pass? Are not these things rather a sign
that the utter overthrow of the church of God is at the door?
Indeed, to sense it is, and reason will be apt to say so: But hark
what the Holy Ghost saith! 'She is fallen! is fallen now!'

When therefore we shall see men like devils; yea, every foul spirit,
and hateful bird, flock to, and take shelter in Babylon; let us
not be frighted or dejected, but pluck up our hearts, and say,
This is one of the signs that the downfall of Babylon is near.
Wherefore it follows, after that the prophet had told us that these
birds should dwell in the land of the people of God's curse (Isa
34). That 'the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad
for them; [for that they are there] and the desert shall rejoice,
and blossom as the rose: It shall blossom, [saith he] abundantly,
and rejoice even with joy and singing: The glory of Lebanon shall
be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall
see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God.' And
to support the weak from those fears that in those days will be
pulling of them down, he adds, 'Strengthen ye the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees. Say to them that are of a fearful heart,
Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance,
even God with a recompence; he will come and save you. Then the
eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall
be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the
tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the desert. And the parched ground shall become
a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: In the habitation
of dragons, where each lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes.
And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called,
The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it
shall be for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err
therein. No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go
up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall
walk there. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to
Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: They shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away'
(Isa 35).

What say ye now, ye sons of God! Will you learn to make a judgment
of things according to the mystery of the wisdom of God, or will
ye longer conclude according to sense and reason: 'He turneth
the shadow of death into the morning' (Amos 5:8). And commands
oft-times, that the fairest day should succeed the foulest night.
Wherefore, when we see these devils, foul spirits, and unclean birds
in Babylon; yea, when we see good men leave her, and the vilest
run in to her, then let us sing the angels' song, and say, 'Babylon
the great is fallen! is fallen! and is become the habitation of
devils, and a hold for every foul spirit, and a cage for every
unclean and hateful bird.'

FOURTH SIGN.

Fourthly, another sign of the approach of the ruin of Antichrist,
is, 'The Slaying of the Witnesses': For the witnesses are to be
slain before the fall of Antichrist; and that by the hand of the
beast, who shall manage the members of Antichrist, having qualified
them before that work, with those qualifications of which you
read in the sign foregoing. For what can better fit a generation
for such a work, than to be themselves all turned devils, and
also succourers of all foul spirits. Wherefore, they must be the
wickedest of men that shall do this: the very scum of the nations,
and the very vilest of people. Nor is this a new notion: God
threatened to give his sanctuary 'into the hands of strangers for
a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil' (Eze 7:21);
To robbers, burglars, and they should defile it (verse 22). Again,
saith God of his people, 'I will bring the worst of the heathen,
and they shall possess their houses' (verse 24). For the truth
is, this work is too bad for men either of reason or conscience
to be found in the practice of. The hangman is usually none of
the best: The witnesses are also to be slain; but not a man, but
a beast must slay them; 'a den of thieves, a hold of foul spirits,'
must do it.

That the witnesses must be slain before the fall of Babylon, has
been hinted already. Also, that their death is a forerunner of
the ruin of Antichrist, has before been touched upon; but in this
place I shall a little enlarge.

And therefore I proceed: 'And when they shall have finished their
testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit
shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill
them. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great
city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also
our Lord was crucified. And they of the people, and kindreds and
tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and
an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put into
graves.' 'And after three days and an half, the spirit of life
from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and
great fear fell upon them which saw them. And they heard a great
voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither: And they
ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them'
(Rev 11:7-12).

Thus you see their death is before their deliverance. Also their
death is to be by the hand of the beast; to wit by the men that
have and hold his mark, and that of his image, and that are of the
number of his name. You see also that their death is not only a
forerunner of their deliverance, but a sign that their deliverance
is at the door; since the one is but three days and an half before
the other.

And if a short comment upon this text will give a little light to
the reader, I shall not count my labour lost.

And when they shall have finished their testimony, when, or about
the time they have done their work of witness-bearing for God
in the world: When they have made or are making an end of giving
their testimony for Christ, and against the witchcrafts, idolatries,
sorceries, fornications, thefts, murders, and wickedness of
Antichrist: Then and not till then.

'The beast that ascended out of the bottomless pit.' The beast:
The power that carrieth and beareth up Antichrist, the mother of
harlots: The beast upon which the woman sitteth, and by the heads
and horns of which she is protected and defended; he is said to
ascend out of the bottomless pit; for that he manifesteth by his
doings, that he was born there, and came to [do] the work of the
king thereof.

'Shall make war against them.' We read that he made war against them
all the time of their prophesying in sackcloth, while they were
bearing their testimony against his doing; and that his commission
was, That he should have leave to make war so long (Rev 12:6). But
here we read again, that when they had finished their testimony,
and so consequently he had run out the time of his first commission
for war, he makes war again. So that this war which now he raiseth
against them, seems to be another, a new war, and such as is
grounded upon other, to wit, new arguments, besides those upon
which his first war stood. By his first war, he sought to beat down
and overthrow their testimony (Rev 13:4). By this war he seeketh
to overthrow themselves. The first war he made, was grounded upon a
vain confidence of his ability to destroy their faith; but this
last was grounded upon madness against them, because their testimony
had prevailed against him: Wherefore, Torment, wherewith these
witnesses by their testimony tormented him and his followers, was
the cause of this last war. And this is insinuated when he saith,
'They make merry for their victory over them, because these two
prophets,' (to wit, by their testimony,) 'tormented them that
dwelt on the earth' (Rev 11:10).

The beast therefore will make a war against the witnesses all the
time of their prophesying in sackcloth, which will be a thousand
two hundred and threescore days (Rev 12:6). In all which time
they shall give him the foil, and overcome him by their faith and
testimony; and be proclaimed more than conquerors over him, through
the Christ that loved them. But now in this second war he overcomes
them, 'he overcomes them, and kills them.'

Jezebel for a long time made war against Elias the prophet,
seeking to overthrow the worship of God which he maintained, and
to establish the religion of Baal: But when she saw that by all
she could do she got nothing, but that the prophet got the day of
her worship, priests and worshippers (1 Kings 18:30-40), she breaks
out into a rage, as one tormented almost to death, and raises a new
war; not now against his religion, but his person, and desperately
swears by all the gods that she had, That by tomorrow that time
the life of the prophet should be as the life of one of her priests
whom he had slain for an idolater (1 Kings 19:2). When the devil
sees that he cannot do by argument, he will try if he can by blows.

When Zedekiah, the son of Chenanah, saw that with argument he
could not overcome Micaiah, he steps to him, and takes him a box
of the ear (1 Kings 22:24). This new war, is a box of the ear which
the beast will give the witnesses, because they overcame him by
their faith and testimony, all the time that the first war lasted.

Now how long this second war will last, and what strugglings the
witnesses will make before he shall overcome them, I know not:
This I know, that the text saith, 'by this war he shall overcome
them.'

'And shall overcome them.' Saints are not said to be overcome,
when they are imprisoned, banished, and killed for their faithful
testimony: No, by these things they overcome. To overcome then,
is to get the mastery, to subdue, to turn out of possession, to
take and hold captive, to strip the subdued of power and privilege,
as is sufficiently manifest both by scripture and reason: 'For of
whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in bondage' (2
Peter 2:19).

So then, when he is said to overcome them, it is meant, he shall
get the mastery of them, they shall grow faint before him, have no
heart or spirit to bear up in their profession against him: Against
him, I say, as she did the thousand two hundred and threescore
days' war with him; for then they were overcomers, and did bear
away the garland.

Nor do I, for my part, wonder at this, when I consider that these
witnesses are a succession of good men; and that when Israel came
out of Egypt of old, the feeble and weak-handed did come behind
(Deu 25:17-19). It will be the lot therefore of the church, in
the latter end of the reign of the beast, to be feeble and weak in
their profession, the valiant ones having gone before: These will
come, when those that were able have bravely borne their testimony,
or when they are upon finishing of that: In comparison of whom,
they that come after will be but like eggs to the cocks of the
game: wherefore they must needs be crushed, cowed, and overcome.
And then will the beast boast himself, as did his type of old,
and say, 'My hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people:
and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the
earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth,
or peeped' (Isa 10:14).

A sad time, and it is to happen to the people that are left, to the
latter end of the witness-bearers; and that too when they shall
have finished their testimony.

Of this tyranny the cruelty of Amalek was a type; who, as was hinted
before, smote the hindermost, the weak: But his judgment is, That
'he shall perish for ever.'

'And shall overcome them.' There are two ways of overcoming; to
wit, by power and policy: And perhaps by both these ways they may
be overcome. However, overcome they shall be; for so saith the
holy word of God; yea, the beast shall overcome them. Wherefore
the church of God, at that day, will be under such a cloud as she
never was since Christ's day. Now how long they shall thus be held
captive before they are brought to execution; whether the beast
will ride in triumph while they are in his bonds; or whether he
will suddenly kill them; that time, and observation, and experience,
must make manifest: But kill them he shall, that's most certain,
for so says the Holy Ghost.

'And shall overcome them, and kill them.' In this method therefore
God will suffer the beast to proceed with the church of God, after
she has sufficiently borne her testimony for him in the world. He
shall 'war against them,' but that is not all: He shall overcome
them, but that is not all; he 'shall overcome them, and kill them.'

'And kill them.' Of their slaughter also I shall speak a word or
two. But first I would note, as all know, that there is a difference
to be put betwixt killing and overcoming: For though every one
that is killed, is overcome: yet every one that is overcome, is
not killed (Acts 21:32): men may be overcome, and yet live (Jer
12:11); but when they are killed, it is otherwise: There may be a
cry heard from the mouth of them that are overcome, but not from
the mouth of them that are killed (Exo 32:18; Acts 7:34): They that
are overcome, may consult their own enlargement, and deliverance;
but they that are killed, cannot do so. I do therefore distinguish
between killed and overcome, because the text doth so: 'He shall
make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.'

'And kill them.' From these words therefore I will take occasion
to inquire,

1. How they are to be considered as to this slaughter.

2. What death they must die to accomplish this prophecy.

FIRST, How they are to be considered?

I answer: Not in a carnal or natural, but in a mystical sense. For,
first, they are called witnesses. Secondly, They are put under the
number of two: 'My two witnesses' (Rev 11:3). Both which are to
be mystically taken.

First, Because their testimony standeth not in their words only,
but in their conversation; yea, in their suffering also: and that
is a mystical witness-bearing.

Secondly, They go under the number of two: Not because there were
indeed two such men in the world, but because two are a sufficient
number to bear witness (Num 35:30; Deu 17:6; 19:15); and God's
church, in the most furious heat and rage of Antichrist, has
been at least of such a number of professing saints, to proclaim
against the beast and his worship in the name of God. To think
that there have been two such men in the world, is ridiculous;
for these witnesses must continue to give their testimony for God
against Antichrist, a thousand two hundred and threescore years.
Nor can they scripturally bear this title, My two witnesses, but
with respect to their prophesying so long. The witnesses therefore
are nothing else but a successive church, or the congregation of
God abiding for him against Antichrist, by reason of a continual
succession of men that is joined by the special blessing of God
unto it.

SECONDLY, What death they must die? I answer, Not a corporeal one,
but that which is mystically such. And I choose to understand it
thus, because this suiteth best with their state and condition,
which is mystical. Besides, thus did they (when they did overcome,)
slay their enemies, even with the fire or sword of their mouth:
'If any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he
must in this manner be killed' (Rev 11:5). As therefore they went
about to kill their enemies, so their enemies will kill them: But
they sought to kill their enemies by their testimony, as to their
antichristian spirit, and church-state; and their enemies will
kill them, as to their Christian heat and fervency of mind; and
also as to their Christian church-state. So that, (at least so
I think,) there will be such ruins brought both upon the spirit
of Christianity, and the true Christian church-state, before this
Antichrist is destroyed, that there will for a time scarce be
found a Christian spirit, or a true visible living church of Christ
in the world: Nothing but the dead bodies of these will be to be
seen of the nations; nor them neither, otherwise than as so many
ruinous heaps. For the love that I bear to the church of Christ,
I wish, as to this, I may prove a false prophet: But this looks
so like the text, and also so like the dispensations of God with
his church of old, that I cannot but think it will be so. For the
text, I have spoken to that already; wherefore I will now present
you with some things that look like parallel cases.

First, When the church was coming out of Egypt, just before they
were delivered from Pharaoh, they were in their own eyes, and
in the eyes of their enemies, none other than dead: 'It had been
better [said they to Moses] for us to serve the Egyptians, than
that we should die in the wilderness' (Exo 14:12). The people
said so, Moses feared, and Pharaoh concluded they were all dead
men (Exo 12:33). Also Paul tells us, 'that they were baptized
[that is, buried] unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea.' They
were, for the time, to use the expression, a dead church both in
the eyes of Pharaoh, in the eyes of Moses, and also in their own.

And 'tis to be taken notice of: As the witnesses in the text were
slain but a little before the ruin of Antichrist began; so this
church was baptized in the sea but a little before great Pharaoh
was drowned there.

Secondly, In the time of Elias, which time also was typical of
this, what church was there to be seen in Israel? None but what
was under ground, buried in dens, and in caves of the earth: Yea,
the prophet could see none, and therefore he cried to God, and
said, Lord, they have 'digged down thine altars,' and slain thy
prophets, 'and I am left alone, and they seek my life' (1 Kings
19:14; Rom 11:3). What visible living church was now in the land,
I mean, either with reference to a godly spirit for it, or the
form and constitution of it? What was, was known to God, but dead
to every man alive.

Thirdly, What was the dry bones that we read of in the 37th
of Ezekiel, but the church of God, and also a figure of what we
are treating of? And why called dry bones, since the people were
alive, with their substance, wives, and children; but to shew, that
that church of God was now, as to their spirit and church-state,
accounted as dead, not only by themselves, but by the king of
Babylon, and the nations round about? Babylon then was the valley,
and the grave; and the church of God were the bones: Bones without
flesh, sinews, or skin; bones exceeding dry; yea so dry and dead
were they, that the prophet himself could not tell whether ever
they should live again (Eze 37:1-3).

Now this, as I said, was a state that was not to end with the church
of Israel, but to be acted over once again by the beast with the
church of the new testament: Yea, it is an easy matter to make
their witnesses in this their death, and the church of Israel in
this their grave, in many things to symbolize.

Fourthly, Take another instance, or rather comparison, into which
the church of God compared herself, when under the king of Babylon's
tyranny: And that is, she counted herself as the dung that the
beast lets fall to the ground from behind him. And doth this look
like a visible church-state? Or has it the smell or savour of such
a thing? Nebuchadnezzar (said she) 'hath swallowed me up like a
dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast
me out' (Jer 51:34). Pray, what would you think of a man, of whom
one should tell you, That he was eaten up of a dragon; made to
fill the belly of a dragon; and cast out as the dung of a dragon?
Would you think that such an one did all this while retain the
shape, form, or similitude of a man? Why, thus the church said she
was, and thus the church shall be again: For she is once more to
be overcome, to be overcome and killed; and that by the beast,
the dragon's whelp, of which the king of Babylon was a type. And
therefore I conclude the premises; that is, That the beast will kill
the church that shall be in the latter days, as to her Christian
spiritedness, and her church-state. And I could further add, That
if we hold they die corporeally, we must conclude, that their
natural body being slain, shall lie three years and an half in
the street; yea, that their resurrection shall be corporeal, &c.
But why we should think thus, as yet I can see no reason, since the
persons are such mystically; the beast mystically so; the street
in which they be, mystically such; and the days of their unburied
state, to be taken mystically likewise. But we will pass this,
and descend to other things.

Fifthly, I will yet add another thing. When Israel was coming out
of Babylon; yea, while they were building of the temple of God,
which was a figure of our church-state now under the Gospel; they
were not only troubled, hindered and molested in their work, but
were made for a time to cease, and let the work lie still.

'Now [says the text] when the copy of king Artaxerxes' letter
[which he sent to forbid the Jews in their work] was read before
Rehum and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went
up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease by
force and power. Then ceased the work of the house of God which
is at Jerusalem. So it ceased unto the second year of the reign
of Darius king of Persia' (Ezra 4:23,24).

And I pray, since their temple-worship was a type of a new testament
church-state and worship, what doth their causing of that work to
cease signify to us, but that we must have a time also to cease as
they? And since their temple-work was caused to cease before the
house was finished, what face could there be at present thereupon,
but that, to look to, it was like some deformed, battered, broken
building, or as such an one that was begun by foolish builders?
Yea, and since the Jews left off to build God's house at the
command of the heathens, what did that bespeak, but that they had
lost their spirit, were quashed, and so as to their temple-work,
killed, as it were, to all intents and purposes? And thus it will
be, a little before the church of God shall be set free from the
beast, and all his angels: For these things were writ for our
admonition, to show us what shall be done hereafter; yea, and
whether we believe or disbelieve hereabout, time will bring it to
pass.

I do not question but many good men have writ more largely of
this matter: but as I have not seen their books, so I walk not by
their rules. If I mistake, the mistakes are only mine; and if I
shall merit shame, I alone must bear it.

Some may think they have said enough, when they assert, that for
the witnesses to be killed, is, To be dead in law. But I answer,
That is not to be overcome. They are here said to be overcome;
and that is more than to be dead in law: For a man may be dead in
law, and yet not be overcome; and if so, then far enough off from
being killed. So then, for as much as they are said to be overcome
and killed, it must be more than to be dead in law. Besides, the
text supposeth that they had yielded up, as dying men do, their
souls, their spirit of life into the hands of God: For it saith
concerning them, That at their resurrection, the spirit of life
from God entered again into them: Into them, antecedent thereunto.
'and after three days and an half the spirit of life from God
entered into them, and they stood upon their feet' (Rev 11:11).
thus it was concerning the dry bones, of which mention was made
before: 'Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy,
son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord God; Come
from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that
they may live' (Eze 37:9). And thus much concerning their killing.

Now, as I said, since in death, the body doth not only lie dead,
but the spirit of life departs therefrom; it is to shew, that not
only their bodies, their church-state, shall die, [for churches
are called bodies, (1 Cor 12:27; Eph 3:6; 4:12; 5:23; Col 1:18)]
but that spirit of life that acted those bodies, shall be taken
up to God. There shall, for a time, be no living visible church
of Christ in the world: A church, but no living church, as to
church-state: A church in ruins, but not a church in order: Even
as there was once a Christ, but no living Christ in the grave; yet
the gates of hell shall not prevail to an utter overthrow thereof,
no more than they prevailed to an utter overthrow of Christ; but
as one did, so shall the other, revive, and rise again, to the utter
confusion and destruction of their enemies: Yea, and as Christ,
after his resurrection, was, as to this body, more glorious than
he was before; so the witnesses, after their resurrection, shall
be more spiritual, heavenly, and exact in all their ways, than they
were before they were killed. Resurrections are always attended
with new additions of glory; and so shall the church of God, as
to her church-state, be in the latter days.

But yet the beast shall not altogether have his will, (if that at
all was his will) that these witnesses, in this second war, should
be conquered to a compliance with Antichrist in his foolish and
vain religion: For it is not with dead men to comply; but as they
are dead to their own church-state, so they are to his. When the
Jews had killed Christ, it was beyond all the art of hell to cause
that his body should see corruption; so when the beast has killed
the witnesses, he shall not be able to corrupt them with any of
his vices.

Hence you find, that not the witnesses, but the dwellers upon the
earth were them that danced after the devil's pipe, when he had
fulfilled their murder.

Nor doth this murder, as to the fulfilling of it in those nations
where the woman sitteth, seem to be a great way off, if all be true
that from foreign parts some have said: For what a withdrawing of
God and of his Spirit is there already in some of the churches of
God! The word worketh not that sound repentance which it was wont
to do: Preachers preach for little, but to spend themselves, as
men that are wounded do when with groans they let out their life.
Where (say some) is the spirit and life of communion? And where
that practical holiness that formerly used to be seen in the
houses, lives and conversations of professors? The whole head is
sick, and the whole heart faint already; and how long will it be
before churches die of the wound that the beast has given them,
time must make appear: But die I perceive they must; for if the
wound already given will not kill, repeated blows shall.

By all that I have said, I do not deny but that many of the people
of God may die corporeally, by the hand of the beast, in this second
war that shall be made by him against the witnesses. But should
as many more die, that will not prove that that death will be that
that by the killing of the witnesses is intended.

Some thing I would bestow upon the reader, for him to carry with
him as a memorandum, while he reads this account of things: As,

First, This victory of the beast, is not to be until the witnesses
have finished their testimony; and so by all that he shall do, he
shall not hinder the revelation of any of the truths that they
either were to bring to light, or to confirm by their witness-bearing.

Witnesses are not always bound to speak: There is a time 'to keep
silence' (Eccl 3:7), and 'thou shalt be dumb' (Eze 3:26). But how
shall we know when this time is come?

1. When a sufficient testimony has been given for Christ, and
against Antichrist, before the God of heaven; for he must be the
judge.

2. When her enemies forbear to plead against her by argument, and
rather betake themselves to blows (Matt 10:19).

3. When the spirit of testimony-bearing is taken from the church;
for that is not essential to Christianity, but is given and taken
away as there is occasion.

4. When testimony-bearing becomes a vain or needless repetition,
when they have heard sufficiently of things before (John 9:27).

Secondly, This victory of the beast shall not invalidate or weaken
their testimony; no, not in the eyes of the world; for they will
still remember, and have a reverence for it: This is intimated
by this, That 'they of the people and kindreds and tongues and
nations--(that are neither the witnesses, nor they that in the
next verse are called the inhabiters, or they that dwell upon the
earth,)--shall not suffer their dead bodies to be (buried, or be)
put in graves' (Rev 11:9).

Thirdly, This shall not lengthen the reign and tranquility of the
antichristian kingdom; nor frustrate, drive back (or cause to tarry)
the glorious freedom and liberty of the saints. But some may say,
This will be a SAD day.

So it will, and gloomy; but it will be but short, and 'the righteous
shall have dominion over them next morning.' 'Twill last but three
days and an half; nor shall it come, but for the sins of churches
and saints, and to hasten the downfall of the kingdom of the beast,
and for the sweetening to the church her future mercies. Christ
Jesus, our Lord, in answer to the question of his disciples, about
the destruction of Jerusalem, presented them with a relation of
many sad things; but when he was come even to the hearts of men,
and had told them 'that they should fail for fear': He said,
'when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift
up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh' (Luke 21:25-28).

'Tis as ordinary as for the light to shine, for God to make black
and dismal dispensations, to usher in bright and pleasing [ones];
yea, and the more frightful that is which goes before, the more
comforting is that which follows after. Instances in abundance
might be given as to this, but at present let this suffice that is
here upon the paper before us; namely, the state of the witnesses,
with their glorious resurrection.

FIFTH SIGN.

Fifthly, Another sign of the approach of the ruin of Antichrist,
will be this: The great joy that will be in her, and among her
disciples, when they shall see that the witnesses are slain, and
lie dead upon the spot: 'And they that dwell upon the earth shall
rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to
another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwell on
the earth' (Rev 11:10). Babylon has been always a merry city, and
her disciples merry men; but the poor church of Christ has been
solitary, and as a wife forsaken; her tears upon her cheeks bear
her witness, and so doth her sackcloth-weed.

Hence our Babylon, under the name of Nineveh, is called, 'the
rejoicing city' (Zeph 2:15). Only her joy is distinguished from
that which is the joy of God's people, by these two things.

First, Either she rejoiceth in outward and carnal glory, or else
in the ruin of the church of God. This last, to wit, the supposed
ruin of the church of God, is that which will be now the cause of
her glorying. And this is the joy that God complaineth of, and for
the which he said that he would punish Babylon: 'Chaldea shall be
a spoil: All that spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the Lord.
Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of
mine heritage,' &c. (Jer 50:10,11). The joy therefore of Babylon,
Antichrist; the joy that she shall conceive in her heart upon the
slaughter of the witnesses, is a sure sign of her unavoidable ruin
and destruction. These two prophets tormented her; they were to
Babylon as Mordecai was to Haman, a continual plague and eye-sore:
As also was David to the wretched Saul: But now they are overcome,
now they are killed; now she rejoiceth, and maketh merry. And this
her joy was of old prefigured by them that in her spirit have gone
before her: As, First, When the Philistines had, as they thought,
for ever overcome Samson, that Nazarite of God, how joyful were
they of the victory! 'Then the lords of the Philistines gathered
them together for to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god,
and to rejoice: for they said, Our god hath delivered Samson our
enemy into our hand. And when the people saw him, [saw him in chains]
They praised their god: for they said, Our god hath delivered into
our hands our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, which slew
many of us' (Judg 16:23,24). Poor Samson! While thou hadst thy
locks, thy liberty, and thine eyes, thou didst shake the pillar
that did bear up their kingdom! But now they have conquered thee,
how great is their joy! How great is their joy, and how near their
downfall! This therefore is a joy that is like that we have under
consideration, to wit, the joy of them that dwell upon the earth;
for that the witnesses that did bear up the name of God in the
world, were overcome and killed.

Secondly, Like to this, is that which you read of in the first
book of Samuel, concerning the men that had burnt David's Ziklag.
Ziklag was poor David's place of safety; nor had he any else but
that under the whole heaven: But the children of the east came upon
it, and took it; set it on fire, and carried thence all David's
substance, with his wives and his children. (Very ill done to a
man in affliction; to a man that went always in fear of his life,
because of the rage of his master Saul.) But how were they that had
got the victory? Oh! joyful, and glad, and merry at heart at the
thoughts of the richness of the booty? 'Behold, they were spread
abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because
of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the
Philistines (from Ziklag) and out of the land of Judah' (1 Sam
30:16). Here again you find a joy and merriment like these that
we have under consideration, and that upon such like accounts.
Nothing pleases the wicked more, than to see the godly go down the
wind; for their words, and lives, and actions are a plague and a
torment to them: As 'tis said of these two prophets, 'They tormented
them that dwelt on the earth.'

Thirdly, While the church of God lay dead in Babylon, and as bones
exceeding dry; what a trampling upon them was there by Belshazzar
a little before his death! He called for his golden and silver
vessels that his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple
of God that was at Jerusalem, (those holy vessels once dedicated
to the worship and service of God) that his princes, his wives
and his concubines might drink therein. An high affront to heaven:
'They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of
brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone' (Dan 5:4). And all to shew
what a conquest, as he thought, he had got over the God of heaven,
and over his people that dwelt in Jerusalem, and over his ordinances
and vessels used in his worship and service: Yea, this he did
with such joy that was not usual, as is intimated by his doing of
it before 'a thousand of his lords,' and that till he had drank
himself drunken. But all this while, as was hinted before, the
church of God, as it were, lay dead at his feet; or as the phrase
is, 'as bones exceeding dry.' This too will be the joy of the
beast and his followers in the latter days; they will make war
with the witnesses; they shall overcome them, and kill them; and
when that is done, they shall rejoice over them, and make merry.
But as Belshazzar soon after this, saw the handwriting that made
his knees knock together; and as he lived not to see the light of
another day; so 'twill be with the beast and his followers; the
next news that we hear upon this mirth and jollity, is, the tenth
part of his kingdom falls, and so on till the whole is ruined.

Thirdly, Moab also, in the day that Israel was taken captive by
their enemies, could not forbear but skip for joy, so glad was he
in his heart thereat. But what saith the jealous Lord? 'Make ye
him drunken: for he magnified himself against the Lord: Moab also
shall--be in derision: For was not Israel (saith God) a derision
unto thee? was he found among thieves? for since thou spakest of
him, thou skippedst for joy' (Jer 48:26,27). Of all things, God
cannot away with this: For when the wicked would rejoice that they
have been suffered to make havoc of the church of God, they deny
the wisdom and power by which they were permitted to do this,
and offer sacrifice to their own net and drag (Hab 1:16); which
provoketh the holiness of Israel: 'Shall the axe boast itself
against him that heweth therewith? or shall the saw magnify itself
against him that shaketh it? As if the rod should shake itself
against them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up
itself, as if it were no wood.' But what follows? Why, burning
and consuming of soul and body of them that do such a thing (Isa
10:15-18). And this text I the rather bring, because 'tis to be
the portion of Antichrist.

And therefore let this be a caution to the men that wonder after
the beast, to caution them to repentance, for he will assuredly go
into perdition. What! shall the witnesses of God be killed! Shall
the beast stand glorying over them while they are dead, with his
feet in their neck? and shall none be angry at it? Let them that
love themselves look to themselves: God will be concerned, and will
assuredly for this quickly put a period to the kingdom and reign
of Antichrist (Jer 50:13).

And although this glorying mistress of iniquity, this Antichrist
and Babylon, may say that her power is the hammer of the whole
earth; yet God will cut him in sunder, and break him in pieces
with his bout-hammers,13 with the kings14 of the earth, that he
will use to do this work withal; that is, when this last sign is
fulfilled: I call it the last sign; I find none that doth intervene
betwixt the slaying of the witnesses, and the beginnings of the
ruin of Antichrist but this.

But a little to comment upon their joy, as the Holy Ghost doth set
it forth. The cause of their joy we have touched already; which
was, for that they had slain their tormentors. For, as was shewed
you, the witnesses had been their tormentors: But when they shall
overcome them, and kill them, they rejoice, make merry, and send
gifts one to another.

This repeating, and repeating with aggravation, doth manifest, and
at that day their joy will be exceeding great: 'They shall rejoice,
and make merry,' &c. They shall rejoice over them, over their slain,
their enemies, their tormenting enemies. This joy therefore, is
a joy that flows from victory, from victory after a war that has
lasted a thousand two hundred and threescore years. They shall
rejoice, as they do that have a most potent, vexatious, and
tormenting enemy lying dead at their foot, and as those that ride
in triumph over them. They shall therefore rejoice as conquerors
used to do, who make the slaughters of their spoiled enemies the
trophy of their joy.

For the devil, that great deceiver of mankind, will so flush up
and bewitch the men that wonder after the beast, with the victory
that they shall get over the faithful witnesses for God and his
Son, that they will think ('twill never be day) that the victory is
so complete, so universal, so thorough, that the conquest must be
lasting. And from sense and reason they will have ground to think
so; for who now is left in the world any more to make head against
them? but here comes in that which will utterly spoil this joy;
these conquered, killed, dead men must come to life again, and
then what's become of their joy? 'And great fear fell upon them
which saw them' (Rev 11:11). Wherefore, this joy must fade and
vanish: But, I say, the followers of the beast will be far from
thinking so; for they will 'rejoice over them, make merry, and
send gifts one to another,' concluding that these tormentors shall
never torment them more. But Jacob's blessing upon his son Gad,
shall be fulfilled upon these witnesses: 'Gad [saith he] a troop
shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last' (Gen
49:19). So then these conquerors must not always rejoice, though
they will suppose they shall, and also make merry too.

'And make merry.' To make merry, is more than to rejoice. To rejoice,
doth shew the present act of the soul; but to make merry, is to
use the means as will keep this joy alive, and on foot. Joy is
one thing, and the continuance of it is another (1 Sam 25:36). Joy
may be begotten by a conceit, a thought; but it cannot be maintained
so; because deliberation will come in and spoil it (Esth 5:4), if
sufficient means is not used to continue it: wherefore he adds,
They rejoiced over them, 'And made merry.'

And there are five things that are usually made use of to keep up
wicked joy. 1. There is the merriment of music (Luke 15:25,32).
2. The merriment of feasting (Judg 19:6,9). 3. The merriment of
laughter (Eccl 10:19). 4. The merriment of fleshly solace (Jer
31:4). 5. Revenge upon a supposed enemy (2 Sam 13:28). So then,
by these five things we see what is the way that sinful joy is
maintained in the hearts of wicked men; and also by what means the
limbs and brats of Antichrist will keep up that joy that at first
will be conceived in their hearts at the thought that now they have
killed their tormentors. They shall have music. They shall have
feasting. They shall have laughter. They shall have fleshly solace.
And they shall have their fill, for the time, of revenge. Thus
therefore shall they rejoice over them, and make merry, all the
time of that little, short everlasting that they are to live in
the world.

'And make merry.' To make merry, to make wicked mirth, there must
be a continual fraternity, or brotherhood in iniquity, maintained
among them, and that where none may come to interrupt; and that
they will be capable of doing any where then, for that their
tormentors will be dead. Wickedness shall walk with open face
in those days; for then there will be none alive for God and his
ways; wherefore, the beast and his train may do what they will: now
will be the time for men to live carelessly and wantonly, and to
make their wantonness their joy, (after the manner of the Zidonians)
for there will be none to put them to shame.

'And shall send gifts one to another.' This is another token of
their gladness, and also a means to buoy them up still. And it will
be a sign that they have joined hand in hand to do this wickedness,
not dreaming of the punishment that must follow. This sending
of gifts to each other, and that after they have slain these two
prophets, doth also declare that they will be far from repentance,
for the commission of so great an offence. Nay, it signifies
further, that they were resolved, and determined to quench all
manner of convictions one in another, that might arise in their
hearts for the sin which they had committed: for a gift blinds
the eyes of the wise, and perverts the judgment of the righteous;
how much more then will it stifle and choke appearances of such
upon the spirits of wicked men! I question not at all but many
have been, by the favours and gifts of wicked men, drawn down into
the belly of hell.

Now what these gifts will be, either as to kind or quantity, that
I can say nothing to: but probably, whatever they will be, there
will be but little of their own cost in them. Victors and conquerors
do used to visit their friends with their spoils won in battle,
with the spoil of the enemies of their God (Ezra 10:7).

And this was David's way, after ha had recovered the loss that he
had sustained at the burning of his Ziklag; he sent to his friends
of what he had taken from his enemies, as token of victory: 'David
sent of the spoil (says the text) unto the elders of Judah, even
to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you of the spoils of
the enemies of the Lord' (1 Sam 30:26); And why may not those we
have now under consideration, do so to their god, and their friends
also? Spoiling is like to be one of the last of the mischiefs
that Antichrist shall do to the church of God in this world: And
methinks, since the beast will have power to overcome, and to
kill, he should also have power to take away (Dan 11:33): 'Hast
thou killed, and also taken possession?' said the prophet to wicked
Ahab.

However, whatever their gifts may be, and at whose cost soever
bought, 'tis a sign their hearts will be open, they shall send
gifts one to another: their merry days will then be come, and their
enemies will then be dead at their feet; wherefore, now they will
have nothing to do but to rejoice over them, and to make merry,
and to send gifts one to another.

Thus as to sense and reason, all shall be hush, all shall be quiet
and still: the followers of the Lamb shall be down; the followers
of the Beast be up, cry peace and safety, and shall be as secure as
an hard heart, false peace, and a deceitful devil can make them.
But behold! While they thus 'sing in the windows,' death is
straddling over the threshold! (Zeph 2:14). While they are crying
peace and safety, sudden destruction cometh: By that they have
well settled themselves at their table with Adonijah (1 Kings 1),
they shall hear it proclaimed with sound of trumpet, the witnesses
are risen again.

Now the Christians' pipes will go again, and surely the earth will
be rent with the sound of their shouts and acclamations, while they
cry with joyful sound, 'The kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for
ever and ever' (Rev 11:15).

But woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with them; for the Lord
Jesus will now begin to shew his jealousy, and to make known his
indignation towards those that have thus cruelly slain his prophets,
digged down his altars, and made such havoc of the afflicted
church of God (Isa 66:14). Now will he whet his glittering sword,
and his hand shall take hold on vengeance, that he may render
a recompence to his enemies, and repay them that hate him (Deu
32:41).

But this he will not do immediately by himself, but by such instruments
as have been spoken of before: of which more particularly to treat,
shall be that I shall next take in hand.

OF THE INSTRUMENTS THAT GOD WILL USE TO BRING ANTICHRIST TO HIS
RUIN.

Although I have hinted at this before, yet it may be convenient
briefly to touch it again. Antichrist, as I have told you, consisteth
of soul and body, and must be destroyed by such instruments as may
most properly be applied to each. Further, As to the soul, spirit
or life of Antichrist, and its destruction, of that we have also
spoken already: It remains then that now we discourse of the ruin
of his body and flesh.

I then take it, That the destruction of her flesh shall come by the
sword, as managed in the hands of kings, who are God's ministers
for the punishment of evil deeds, and the praise of them that do
well (Rom 13). Not that the church, even as a church, shall be
quite exempt and have therein no hand at all; for she, even as
such, shall with her faith and prayers help forward that destruction.

The church therefore, as a church, must use such weapons as are
proper to her as such; and the magistrate, as a magistrate, must
use such weapons as are proper to him as such. When the church
of Israel were prisoners in Babylon, they did not fight their way
through their foes, and the countries to Jerusalem; but waited
in their captivated state with patience, until the kings of the
Medes and Persians came to deliver them. Nor is it to be sleighted,
but to be thought on seriously, that before there was an Israelite
captive in Babylon, their deliverer Cyrus was prophesied of:
which Cyrus did afterwards come and take Babylon, and deliver the
captives, as it was foretold he should. He saith unto Cyrus, 'He
is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to
Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation
shall be laid' (Isa 44:28). And again, 'Thus saith the Lord to
his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden to subdue
nations before him, &c. I have raised him up in righteousness, and
I will direct all his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall
let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord of
Hosts' (Isa 45:1,13). And this accordingly he did, to wit, when
the time was come; as may be seen in those holy records where these
things are made mention of. Indeed, as I said, the church is not
excluded (2 Chron 36:2); she may, and ought, with her faith and
prayer, and holy life, to second this work of kings (Ezra 1:2,3).
Wherefore, when God speaks of bringing down the lofty city and of
laying it low in the dust by the church, he saith, they shall do
it by their feet, and with their steps: 'The foot shall tread it
down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy' (Isa
26:6).

By feet and steps, I understand the good lives of the children of
God: but now, when kings come to deal with her, as kings, they
serve her as Samuel served Agag, as a judge, 'cut her in pieces
with their swords': or as you have it elsewhere, 'They make her
desolate and naked; they eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.'
The sword will be put into their hands for this very purpose. Thus
therefore must their deliverance be begun.

It is also to be considered, That after these first kings of the
Medes and Persians had broken the yoke of the king of Babylon from
off the neck of the captive church, and had given her license
to go to her place to build her temple and city, and to sacrifice
there according to the law of their God, (as both in Ezra and
Nehemiah we read;) and when their work was hindered by under-officers,
or they endeavoured so to do, they pleaded the license that they
received to build and sacrifice by the decree of the first kings,
and so finished their deliverance: They went not on in headstrong
manner, as if they regarded neither king nor Caesar: 'But Zerubbabel,
and Joshua, and the rest of the chief of the fathers of Israel,
said unto them,' that sought to hinder their work, 'Ye have nothing
to do with us to build an house unto our God; but we ourselves
will build unto the Lord God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of
Persia hath commanded us' (Ezra 4:3). And as they said, so also
they did: 'The elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered
through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the
son of Iddo. And they builded, and finished it, according to the
commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the commandment
of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia' (Ezra 6:14).
Yea, they did not only accept of the kindness of kings, but did
acknowledge that kindness with thanksgiving, as a gift of the God
of heaven: for the kings had commanded and given leave to the Jews
to go to Jerusalem, to build their temple, and to do sacrifice
there, according to the counsel of the priests that were at
Jerusalem, and according to the law of God that they had in their
hand (Ezra 7:13,14). For Artaxerxes sent Ezra the priest to inquire
after the condition that Jerusalem and Judah was in, according to,
or by the law of God that was in his hand (verse 14). And he had
license also further to do with the king's silver and gold, which
he gave of the service of the house of the Lord, 'according to the
will, word or law of HIS God.' 'And thou, Ezra, [says the king]
after the wisdom of thy God, [that is, after his word] that is in
thine hand, set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the
people that are beyond the river, all such as know the laws of
thy God; and teach ye them that know them not. And whosoever will
not do the law of thy God, [that is, worship, and walk by the
rule of his testament,] and the law of the king, [that is, shall
refuse to give Ezra such things as by the king was appointed for
Ezra's help in the furthering of the worship of God, according to
the law of his God,] let judgment be executed speedily upon him
whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation
of goods, or to imprisonment' (Ezra 7:25,26). This was therefore
a wonderful gracious license that the king now gave to Ezra: he
imposed nothing upon him or the Jews in matters of religion and
worship, but left him and them wholly to the law, will, and word
of God, only he laid check upon wicked and ungodly people: that
if they did things contrary to the laws of Ezra's God, or did
sleight the king's law, as aforesaid, that then such penalties
and pains should be inflicted upon them.

To the same purpose was the decree of Cyrus, and that of Darius,
to put it in execution. Also the penalty enacted against such
offenders, was full as sharp and severe: 'Also I have made a
decree [said the king,] that whosoever shall alter this word, let
timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be
hanged thereon; and let his house be made a dunghill for this.--And
the God that hath caused his name to dwell there destroy all kings
and people, that shall put to their hand to alter and to destroy
this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have made a
decree; let it be done with speed' (Ezra 6:11,12).

Indeed, sometimes a stop was put to this work by the kings, and
the Jews were made to cease by force and power, (Ezra 4:23,24) the
which the good people did bear with patience (Ezra 4:11-21): also
they waited to see their God go before them among the kings, who
at length took away Artaxerxes, who for a time had put a stop to
the work, and brought in another, who gave leave that with speed
it should be set on foot again (Ezra 5).

The Jews did also in these vacancies, or times in the which
hindrances were put, carry it very tenderly and lovingly to those
kings that at present they were under, submitting of their bodies
and their goods to their will, and meekly endured the trial and
affliction, serving them with all faithfulness, watching to save
their lives from the hands of bloody men. Also when the king's laws,
and the law of their God, did at any time come in competition,
they would indeed adhere to, and do the law of their God; yet with
that tenderness to the king, his crown and dignity, that they could
at all times appeal to the righteous God about it (Dan 6:22). Nor
did they lose by so doing; yea, they prospered; for by this means
Mordecai was made a great man, and a saviour of his people (Esth
2:21-23) By this means also was Daniel made a great man, and
helpful to his brethren (Dan 5:29).

Kings, I say, must be the men that must down with Antichrist, and
they shall down with her in God's time.

God hath begun to draw the hearts of some of them from her
already, and he will set them, in time, against her round about.
If therefore they do not that work so fast as we would have them,
let us exercise patience and hope in God: 'tis a wonder that they
go so fast as they do, since the concerns of whole kingdoms lie
upon their shoulders, and that there are so many Sanballats and
Tobias's to flatter with them and misinform them concerning the
people that are delivered but in part. See what an ugly account
was given of Jerusalem by the enemies of the Jews, even then when
they were in the hands of their deliverers: 'Be it known unto the
king, that the Jews which came up from thee to us, are come unto
Jerusalem, building the rebellious and bad city, and have set up
the walls thereof, and joined the foundations.--Be it known now
unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and the walls set
up again, then will they not pay toll, tribute, and custom, and
so thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings' (Ezra 4:12,13).
Oh! what a be it known, be it known, is here! But were not these
gentlemen more afraid of losing their own places and preferments,
than of the king's losing of his toll and custom? But the whole
was a lie, though it hindered the work for a time, and the patience
of the people, and their loyalty to the king, did conquer and
overcome all.

I speak the more to this, because, (as I have said) I believe that
by magistrates and powers we shall be delivered and kept from
Antichrist; and because God has already begun to do it by such,
by which also she shall be destroyed: and I have a few things to
present to good men, to be conversant in, in such a day as this.

Let the king have verily a place in your hearts, and with heart and
mouth give God thanks for him; he is a better saviour of us than
we may be aware of, and may have delivered us from more deaths
than we can tell how to think. We are bidden to 'give thanks to
God for all men, and in the first place, for kings, and all that
are in authority' (1 Tim 2:1,2).

Be not angry with them, no, not in thy thought; but consider, if
they go not on in the work of reformation so fast as thou wouldest
they should, the fault may be thine; know that thou also hast
thy cold and chill frames of heart, and sittest still when thou
shouldest be up and doing.

Pray for kings to the God of heaven, who has the hearts of kings
in his hand: and do it 'without wrath, and doubting'; without wrath,
because thy self is not perfect; and without doubting, because
God governeth them, and has promised to bring down Antichrist by
them.

Pray for the long life of the king.

Pray that God would always give wisdom and judgment to the king.

Pray that God would discover all plots and conspiracies against
his person and government.

Pray also that God would make him able to drive away all evil and
evil men from his presence; and that he may be a greater countenancer
than ever, of them that are holy and good, and wait and believe,
that God that has begun his quarrel with Babylon, Antichrist, the
mother of Antichrist, the whore; would in his own time, and in
his own way, bring her down by the means which he has appointed.

I do confess myself one of the old-fashion professors, that covet
'to fear God, and honour the king.' I also am for blessing of
them that curse me, for doing good to them that hate me, and for
praying for them that despitefully use me, and persecute me. And
have had more peace in the practice of these things, than all
the world are aware of. I only drop this, because I would shew my
brethren that I also am one of them; and to set them right that
have wrong thoughts of me, as to so weighty matters as these.15

Now these kings whose hearts God shall set to destroy Antichrist,
shall do it without those inward reluctancies that will accompany
inferior men: they shall be stript of all pity and compassion.
Hence they are compared to the mighty waves of the sea (Jer
51:42), which saith, when the wrecked and dying mariners cry out
for mercy for themselves, and for their children, I am a sea; 'I
travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up
young men, nor bring up virgins' (Isa 23:4,5): I have therefore no
pity for these, or any of them. Therefore they must be swallowed
up of this sea, and sink like a stone in the midst of these mighty
waters.

And thus much for the means by which God will destroy the body
and flesh of Antichrist.

OF THE CAUSES OF THE RUIN OF ANTICHRIST.

Although the causes of the ruin of Antichrist be to some conspicuous
enough, yet to some they may be otherwise; yea, and will to all
kings and people whose eyes shall be held, that they may not see
the judgment, in the reasonableness and equitableness thereof; and
these shall wail when they see 'the smoke of her--torment'; and
these shall cry, Alas! Alas! (Rev 18:10). Wherefore, for further
edification, as I have treated of the man of sin already; so will
I now, of the causes of his downfall. And,

FIRST CAUSE.

First, He must down, for that he hath usurped, and taken the name
and attributes of God upon himself: He hath said, 'I am God': He
hath set in the temple of God, 'shewing himself that he is God';
yea, and that in contempt and scorn of any other, 'exalting himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshiped' (2 Thess 2);
yea, hath cried down all gods but himself. Wherefore it must needs
be, that he be brought to judgment, that the truth of his saying
may be proved. And for this cause he is threatened, under the name
of the prince of Tyrus: 'Because thine heart is lifted up (saith
the Lord) and thou hast said, I am a god,--therefore I will bring
strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall
draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall
defile thy brightness. They shall bring thee down to the pit, and
thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain in the midst of
the seas. Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I am
god? but thou shalt be a man, and no god, in the hand of him that
slayeth thee' (Eze 28:2,7-9).

If God will not give his name or glory to another, be sure he will
not be under another; but this to have, and thus to do, Antichrist
has attempted. But how? In that he has been so bold as to prescribe
and impose a worship besides, and without reverence of that which
God has prescribed and imposed: For to do this, is, to make one's
self a God. 'Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or
the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in
the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: thou
shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them': For he that
thus doth, is an idolater; and he that these things doth impose,
is one that shews himself a God. But this doth Antichrist do: And
'tis worth the noting, That God forbids not only images, but the
likeness of any thing; books, altars, fancies, imaginations, or
any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, to bow down
to, or to make them a means to worship or come to God by, if he
has not commanded nor tolerated them in his holy word.

Thus saith the Lord: And, I am the Lord, is the stamp, the seal,
and sign of all true rules of worship; and therefore it is so often
repeated both in Moses, and in the prophets, where God commandeth
worship to be performed, and imposeth the means and methods of it.
Now this, Thus saith the Lord, Antichrist has rejected; and I am
the Lord, he hath assumed to himself: and therefore without the
law, the word and commandment, hath framed and imposed a worship,
exalting himself in the temple of God, although he is but the man
of sin, above all that is called God, or that is worshiped.

Nor is he in this his so foul a fact, without them that adore,
worship his image, and wonder after him; yea, he hath got by this
means almost the whole world to himself, who say, 'Who is like
unto the beast? Who is able to make war with him?' (Rev 13:4).
And that they might shew their resolvedness to stand by him, they
receive his mark in their forehead, or in their hand; His mark;
that is, they either openly or seriously become his disciples,
and worship him according to the rules, methods, and ways that he
hath prescribed. Wherefore, these with him, are also to drink of
the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God: 'If any man worship
the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or
in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation;
and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence
of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb' (Rev 14:9,10).

But, I say, for that Antichrist hath thus taken the place of God,
prescribed and imposed a worship as a God, got the world to worship
and wonder after him as after a God. Therefore shall he die the
death of the uncircumcised, both in the soul, spirit, body, or
flesh of Antichrist; therefore will God enlighten, and gather,
and set the kings and nations against him, that both he and his
may be buried, and have their dolesome withdrawing-rooms from the
world in the sides of the pit's mouth.

SECOND CAUSE.

Secondly, Antichrist must be destroyed, because he hath set himself
against the Son of God; against the Father, and against the Son.
He had a spite against the Son betimes, even then when he came
forth but in little bits, when he attempted to deny that he was
come in the flesh (1 John 4:1-4). But seeing he could make no
earnings of that, he hath changed his methods, and seeks to run
him out and down by other means and ways: because therefore he
hath set himself against the Son of God, the king, therefore he
must die. That he hath set himself against the Son of God, is also
evident; for he hath his name from thence: He is therefore called
Antichrist. That he hath set himself against him, is yet further
evident; for that he hath endeavoured to take from him his headship
over, and his offices for and in the church, which is his body.
He hath plainly endeavoured to be head, for that he hath striven
to take his wife from him, and to cause that she should be called
HIS: Yea, he hath endeavoured by all inventions to prostrate her
to his lusts, to deflower her, and to maker her an adulteress. He
has been worse than Pharaoh, who took Abraham's wife (Gen 12); and
worse than Abimelech, who lusted after Isaac's (Gen 26): Yea, worse
than Phalti, who run away with David's (1 Sam 25:44); forasmuch
as she is higher, beloved better, and cost more than did any
of these. Would it not be counted an high affront, for a base
inferior fellow, to call himself the head of the queen? Yet thus
has Antichrist done, and worse; he has called himself the head of
the universal church of God.

And as he has attempted to be head in his stead, so to be king,
priest, and prophet.

[1.] He has attempted to wrest his sceptre and kingdom from him,
in that he hath endeavoured to thrust himself into his throne,
which is the heart and conscience of his people. The heart and
conscience is that which Christ claimeth for his own proper and
peculiar seat: 'My son, give me thy heart.' 'That Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith' (Eph 3:17). In this therefore the church
is not to be for another man, so will he be for her; but this
throne Antichrist has lusted for, attempted to take, and made war
with Christ and his church, because they would not yield up to
him this glorious throne of his, and therefore he must die.

[2.] He hath intruded upon the priestly office of Christ, hath
called himself high-priest; though the Lord hath said, 'Because
thou has rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou
shalt be no priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of
thy God, I will also forget thy children' (Hosea 4:6). But he will
make himself a priest; he hath invented sacrifices for the quick
and the dead: he hath put, as he presumes, merit and worth into
these sacrifices; he hath commanded that those that worship, should
have faith in, and expect benefit by these sacrifices, although
he offereth to his God nought else but the flesh of the hog, and
of the mouse, with the broth of his abominable things (Isa 66:17).
Many and sundry ways he hath set himself up to be high-priest,
though God knows no high-priest but one, though the church ought
to know no high-priest but one; yea, though no high-priest but
one can approach God's mercy-seat, to do for us the necessary and
desired work.

[3.] He hath intruded upon the prophetical office of Jesus Christ.
What else means his pretences to infallibility?16 And that too when
he imposes unwritten verities, abominable traditions, blasphemous
rites and ceremonies; and forbids or dispenseth with the holy
commands of God: Yea, when he enforceth these his Omrian statutes,
and doth impose the works of the house of Ahab (Micah 6:16), he
doth all in the name of the Lord Christ, when himself hath set
himself in his place, and in his room. This is mystery Babylon,
the mystery of iniquity: This is Antichrist's soul and body, and
as such, must be destroyed. But,

THIRD CAUSE.

Thirdly, Antichrist must be destroyed, because he hath blasphemed
against the Holy Ghost, and so set himself above the Father, the
Son, the Spirit; against ALL that is called God. The Holy Ghost
is that Spirit of truth that Christ has promised to give unto his
church, to help her in the understanding of his holy word, and to
enable her to believe, and walk humbly and holily before God and
man. The spirit of Antichrist is that spirit of error that hath
puffed up the false church into a conceit of herself, and unscriptural
worship; and that hath made this false church, which is his body,
to ascribe all the horrible things and acts thereof, to the wisdom,
guidance, directions or operations of the Holy Ghost: As,

1. In all her unscriptural councils, assemblies and convocations,
they blasphemously father what they do upon the Holy Ghost, and
make him the inventor and approver thereof.

2. She also blasphemeth the Holy Ghost, in accusing and condemning
the holy scriptures of insufficiency, for that she saith, though
it is a rule, yet but an imperfect one; one deficient, one that
is not able to make the man of God perfect in all things, without
the traditions, inventions, and blasphemous helps of antichristian
wisdom.

3. She hath also blasphemed the Holy Ghost, in that she hath set
up her own church-government, offices, officers and discipline:
None of all which is the church of Christ directed to by the wisdom
of the Spirit of God in his testament.

4. She hath also sinned against the Holy Ghost, in that she hath,
as it were, turned the Holy Ghost out of doors, in concluding that
he, without the works of the flesh, is not sufficient to govern
the hearts of worshippers, in the service and worship of God.

5. She hath also thus sinned, in that she hath wrought many lying
miracles in the face of the world, and imposed them upon her disciples
for the confirming of her errors and blasphemous opinions, to the
confronting of the true miracles wrought by the Holy Ghost; and
also to the concluding, that there was an insufficiency in those
that were true, to confirm the truth, without the addition of
hers; which she has wrought by the power of Satan, and the spirit
of delusion, only to confirm her lies.

6. She hath sinned against the Holy Ghost, in that she hath, with
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, striven against the judgments wherewith
God hath punished her; to call her back from her wicked way; and
persisted therein, to the effectual proving of herself to be the
lewd woman (2 Kings 13:4-7,23,24).

7. She hath sinned, by labouring to hide all her wickedness, by
lies, dissimulations, and filthy equivocations of her priests,
friars, Jesuits, &c. I say, her labouring to hide the wickedness
that she hath committed against kings, countries, nations, kingdoms
and people. She hath hid these things by the means or persons made
mention of before; as by the tail; for they indeed are the tail
of the beast, that cover his most filthy parts: The prophet that
speaketh lies, he is the tail (Isa 9:15). But,

FOURTH CAUSE.

Fourthly, Antichrist must be destroyed, for the horrid outrage,
and villainous murders that she hath committed upon the bodies of
the saints. For there is none, as to these things, for cruelty,
to be compared with the church of Antichrist, and her followers:
For upon whom hath not her cruelty been shewed; have they never so
little stood in her way, though never so innocently and honestly
by so doing, stood to the truth and verity of God? Yea, the
promoting of her own superstition, idolatry, and blasphemous rites
and ceremonies, have been so pursued by her, that she has waded
through a sea of innocent blood for the accomplishment thereof.

The poor church of God is a sensible bleeding witness of this, and
so has been for hundreds of years together; witness the chronicles
of all nations where she hath had to do; yea, and the sackcloth
and ashes, and tears, and widows, and fatherless children, and
their cries, of all which the holy word of God is a sufficient
confirmation; 'And in her,' when God shall come to make inquisition
for blood, 'will be found the blood of prophets and of saints,
and of all that were slain upon the earth' (Rev 18:24). And yet
has she such a whore's forehead, such a blindness in her judgment,
and such an hard and obdurate heart, that it is not possible
she should ever repent. Murders have been so natural to her, and
in them her hand has been so exercised, that it is now become
a custom, a trade, a pastime to her, to be either in the act, or
laying some foundation for murders: Witness those plots, designs
conspiracies, and frequent attempts that are, one or other of them,
continually on foot in the world for the commission of murders.

Nay, the text last mentioned seems to import, that blood is so
natural to her, that she sticketh not at any condition, sex, age,
or degree, so she may imbrue her hands in blood. In her was found
the blood of saints and prophets, and of all other carnal, natural,
ignorant, graceless men that have been slain upon the earth. It is
she that sets kings and kingdoms at variance: It is she that sets
parents and children at variance, by her abuse of the word of our
Lord and Christ. And besides, is it not easy, if we do but consider
those bloody massacres that have been committed by her hand,
both in France, Ireland, Piedmont, and in several places besides,
without wronging of her, to conclude, that the blood of thousands,
that have not known their right hand from their left in religion,
hath been shed, to quench, if it might have been, her insatiate
thirst after blood. Therefore, for these things shall she be
judged, as women that shed blood are judged; because she is an
adulteress, and blood is in her hands (Eze 23:45). She hath been
as a beast of prey: Nay, worse; for they do but kill and tear for
the hunger of themselves, and of their whelps: but she, to satisfy
her wanton and beastly lusts. 'They have cast lots for my people;
[saith God] and have given a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl
for wine, that they might drink' (Joel 3:3): and therefore must
Antichrist be destroyed. Forbearance is no payment, God's patience
is not a sign that he forgetteth to take vengeance; but rather,
that he waiteth till his own are come out of her, and until
her iniquity is filled up: For then he will execute the judgment
written, and will remember, as has been said, the Babylonians,
and all their ways. 17

FIFTH CAUSE.

Fifthly, Antichrist must be destroyed, because she hath put out
of order, and confounded the rule and government that God has set
up in the world. I say, she has put it out of order, and confounded
it in all places where she rules; so that it cannot accomplish
the design of him that ordained it, To wit, To be a terror to evil
works, and a praise to them that do well. Wherefore we read, That
those horns or kings where Mystery Babylon sitteth, are upon the
heads of that beast that carrieth her, which beast is her protector.
Magistracy is God's ordinance, appointed for the good of society,
and for the peace and safety of those that are good. But this
Antichrist has, where she rules, put all out of order; and no
wonder, for she has bepuddled the word of God; no wonder, then,
I say, if the foundations of the world be out of course. 'Tis she
that hath turned the sword of the magistrate against those that
keep God's law: 'Tis she that has made it the ruin of the good and
virtuous, and a protection to the vile and base. Wherefore, when
the Holy Ghost tells us, that the time is coming in which God will
count with the bloody-minded, for the murders that they have
committed; he in a manner doth quite excuse the magistrate, saying,
'Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and robbery; the
prey departeth not: The noise of a whip, and the noise of the
rattling of the wheels, and of the prancing horses, and of the
jumping chariots. The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword,
and the glittering spear: and there is a multitude of slain, and
a great number of carcases; and there is no end of their corpses;
they stumble upon their corpses' (Nahum 3:1-3). But what is the
cause of all this slaying, and the reason of this abundance of
corpses? Why, it is because of the unsatiable thirst of the bloody
city after blood: and, 'Because of the multitude of the whoredoms
of the well-favoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that
selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her
witchcrafts' (verse 4). But doth this bloody city spill this blood
by herself simply, as she is the adulterated whore? No, this church
has found out a trick; that is to say, to quarrel with Christ in
his members; and to persuade the powers where she rules to set
ensnaring laws to catch them, and to execute the same upon them.

Thus when the synagogue of Satan, of old, had taken Christ, and
accused him, they made Pontius Pilate to condemn and hang him.
But God has begun to shew to some of the kings this wickedness,
and has prevailed with them to PROTEST against her. And in the
mean time, for those that are yet in the bed of love with her,
the Holy Ghost doth, in the text last mentioned, and in Revelation
18:24 much excuse them for the blood that they have shed, and for
the injuries that they have done to his people; because they have
not done it of their mere inclinations, nor in the prosecution of
their office, but through the whoredoms and witchcrafts of this
well-favoured harlot, who hath with false doctrines, false promises,
and causeless curses, prevailed on them to do it. And they have
done it, rather of fear than favour. Some indeed have more doted
upon her beauty, and have more thoroughly been devoted to her
service: But they also had not that aptness to do so of themselves,
but have been forced to it by the power of her enchantments:
Therefore, I say, the main guilt shall be laid at her door, for
that she in chief has deserved it. 'Son of man [says God] take
up a lamentation for the princes of Israel.' Why? Because their
mother, the church, was at that time adulterated, and become
a lioness, had lain down with the heathen, and so brought forth
young lions, that is, rulers: 'And she brought up one of her
whelps: it became a young lion, and it learned to catch the prey;
it devoured men' (Eze 19:1-3). It learnt, It learnt: But of who
but of its dam, or of the lioness to whom she had put it to learn
to do such things? Therefore they are to be lamented and pitied,
rather than condemned, and their mother made to bear the blame.
Wherefore it follows, 'She was plucked up in fury, she was cast down
to the ground, and the east wind dried up her fruit: her strong
rods were broken and withered; the fire consumed them. And now
she is planted in the wilderness, (in the provinces of Babylon,)
in a dry and thirsty ground. And fire is gone out of a rod of her
branches, which hath devoured her fruit, so that he hath no strong
rod to be a sceptre to rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be
for a lamentation' (Eze 19:12-14).

SIXTH CAUSE.

Sixthly, Antichrist must be destroyed, because of her exceeding
covetousness. Religion, such as it is, is the thing pretended to:
But the great things of this world, are the things really intended
by her in all her seeming self-denials and devotions. And for this
covetousness also it is that this destruction is to fall upon her:
'Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, (to
his church) that he may set his nest on high' (Hab 2:9); (for he
could not do the one, before he had obtained the other:) for then
indeed they began to be high, when they had so inveigled Constantine,
that he bestowed upon them much riches and honour; and then it was
cried by an angel, and the cry was heard in the city, Constantinople!
'Woe! woe! woe! this day is venom poured into the church of God!'
(as both my Lord Cobham and Mr. Fox witness in the book of Acts
and Monuments).18

Nor has any generation since the world began, been so insatiably
greedy of gain, as these poor people have been: They have got
kingdoms, they have got crowns, they have got,--What have they
not got? They have got everything but grace and pardon. Did I say
before, that religion is their pretence? Doth not the whole course
of their way declare it to their face? Every one of them, from
the least even to the greatest, is given to covetousness, from the
prophet even to the priest, every one dealeth falsely (Jer 6:13,
8:10): Money, money, as the peddlar cries,19 broken or whole, is
the sinews of their religion: And it is for that they set kingdoms,
crowns, principalities, places, preferments, sacraments, pardons,
prayers, indulgences, liberty; yea, and souls and bodies of men,
women and children, to sale. Yea, it is for this that they have
invented so many places, offices, names, titles, orders, vows,
&c. It is to get money, to rob countries, that they may make their
nests on high. And indeed they have done it, to the amazement of
all the world. They are clambered up above kings and princes, and
emperors:20 They wear the triple-crown: They have made kings bow
at their feet, and emperors, stand barefoot at their gates: They
have kicked the crowns of princes from their heads, and set them
on again with their toes.21 Thus their covetousness has set them
high, even above the suns, moons and stars of this world: but to
what end? That they may be cast down to hell.

SEVENTH CAUSE.

Seventhly, Antichrist must be destroyed, because he standeth in
the way of the setting up of the kingdom of Christ in the world.
Many princes were in Edom before there was a king in Israel; and
Christ has suffered Antichrist to set up before him. And he standeth
in his way, and has so overspread the world in all places, with
that which is directly contrary to him, that he cannot set up his
kingdom, until that which is Antichrist's is tumbled down to the
ground; even as a man whose ground is full of thorns, and briars,
and weeds, cannot sow in expectation of a crop, until he hath
removed them. And these seeds has Antichrist sown where the kingdom
of Christ should stand: 'Upon the land of my people shall come up
thorns and briars; yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous
city: Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the
city shall be left; the forts and towers shall be for dens for
ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks, [this is to happen
to the church of God,] Until the Spirit be poured upon us from
on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful
field be counted for a forest' (Isa 32:13-15). And the antichristian
synagogue be turned into a wilderness.

When God came from Egypt with his people, to set up his kingdom
in Canaan, he cast out the heathen before them in order thereunto;
'Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the
heathen, and planted it' (Psa 80:8). Wherefore, Antichrist must
be removed and destroyed for this: For Antichrist is in flat
opposition to Christ, as Tibni was to Omri (1 Kings 16:21,22):
Wherefore Antichrist must die. The reason is, because Christ's
kingdom shall be peaceable, without molestation; and glorious,
without the fumes and fogs of antichristian darkness: Because also,
as the world hath seen the manner of the reign of Antichrist, and
how tyrannical and outrageous a kingdom his is: so they shall see
the reign of Christ, by his word and spirit in his people, how
peaceable, how fruitful in blessedness and prosperity his kingdom
is. And hence it is that God purposeth to bury Antichrist, before
he sets 'glory in the land of the living' (Eze 26:20,21). As
also you read in the book of Revelations; for there you find the
kingdom of Antichrist was destroyed before the new Jerusalem was
set up. When men intend to build a new house, if in the place
where the old one stood, they first pull down the old one, raze
the foundation, and then they begin their new. Now God, as I said,
will have his primitive church-state set up in this world, (even
where Antichrist has set up his;) wherefore, in order to this,
Antichrist must be pulled down, down stick and stone; and then
they that live to see it, will behold the new Jerusalem come down
from heaven, as a bride adorned for her husband.

New wine is not put into old bottles, nor a new piece into an old
garment; nor shall any of the old anti-scriptural ordinances,
ceremonies, rites, or vessels of the man of sin, be made use of,
or accounted anything worth, in this day of the kingdom of Jesus
Christ. And thus I have shewed you something of Antichrist, of
his ruin, and of the manner and signs of the approach thereof;
together with the means and causes of his ruin. All which I leave
to the judgment of the godly, and beg their instruction where
they see me to be out; and shall conclude, after a short word of
application.

First, Must Antichrist be destroyed? Then this informs us, that
a time is coming wherein there shall be no Antichrist to afflict
God's church any more. 'Tis Antichrist, antichristians, and
antichristianism, that is the cause of the troubles of Christians,
for being Christians. And therefore 'tis from the consideration of
this that it is said, men 'shall beat their swords into plough-shares,
and their spears into pruning-hooks,' and that they 'shall learn
war no more' (Isa 2:4): Yea it is from the consideration of this,
that it is said the child shall play with venomous and destroying
beasts, and that a little child shall lead the wolf, the leopard,
and the young lion, and that the weaned child shall put his hand
into the cockatrice's den, and catch no hurt thereby (Isa 11:6-9).
For as was said before, 'tis through the instigation of this
spirit of error, that the governors of the world have heretofore
done hurt to Zion, and I say now again, all things shall turn to
their right course, and occupy their places, as do the bodies in
the higher orbs.

Secondly, Is Antichrist to be destroyed, and must she have an
end? Then this gives us to understand, that a day is coming when
Antichrist shall be unknown, not seen, nor felt by the church of
God. There are men to be born who shall not know Antichrist, but
as they read in the word that such a thing has been. These shall
talk of her, as Israel's childrens' children were to talk of
Pharaoh, of his cruelty; of his tasks, of his pride, of the Red
Sea, and how he was drowned there: They shall talk of them, as of
those that have been long dead; as of those who for their horrible
wickedness, are laid in the pit's mouth. This will be some of
that sweet chat that the saints shall, at their spare hours, have
in time to come. When God has pulled this dragon out of the sea,
this leviathan out of his river, and cast his dead carcase upon
the open field, then shall those whose ancestors have been put
into terrors by him, come flocking to see the monster; and shall
rejoice for all the mercy. In that day, the church of God shall
say, 'O Lord I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me,
thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me.--In that day
shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his
doings among the people,' &c. (Isa 12:1,4). O how sweetly did David,
and the church in his day, sing of the ruins of the Egyptians,
and the deliverances of their fathers, which had been in times of
old! (Psa 68). to wit, what God did in Egypt, what he did at the
Red Sea; what he did to Sihon, to Og, and to the remnant of the
giants: How he divided the waters of Jordan, and gave the land of
Canaan in its fruitfulness among his people (Psa 105): How that
though Pharaoh and his horsemen and chariots were terrible then,
yet now there is nothing left but their souls, their feet, and
the palms of their hands; nothing but that which can do no hurt;
nothing but what may minister an occasion of joyful remembrance
of them (Psa 106; 132).

Thirdly, Is Antichrist to be destroyed? Then this calls aloud to
God's people to make haste to come out of her. 'Ho, ho,' says the
prophet: He cries out as if the people were asleep: 'Come forth,
and flee from the land of the north' (Zech 2:6). The people of
God in the latter days will want a heart to come out of her, with
that fear of her plagues as they should: Wherefore another says,
'Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins
and that ye receive not of her plagues' (Rev 18:4). When Israel
was carried into Babylon, 'twas not that they should dwell there
for ever: Though they were bid to build them houses, and beget
them children there. But when they had built, planted vineyards,
and got wives and children there, 'twas hard getting them from
thence again: For now they were as it were naturalized to the
country, and to the manners of it (Jer 29:4-7). But God will have
them out, (but they must not think to carry thence their houses
and vineyards on their backs,) or he will destroy them with those
destructions wherewith he hath threatened to destroy Babylon
itself. Flesh will hang behind, because it favoureth the things
of the flesh, plenty of which there is in that country: But they
that will live after the flesh must die. 'Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate,--and touch not the unclean thing;
and I will receive you, and will be a father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty' (2 Cor
6:17,18). But why (some may say) must we come out? I answer, because
God has temple-work to do, temple-worship to do, temple-sacrifices to
offer, and none of these things can by any means be done, but at
Jerusalem. But if you still object and say, 'The Lord has raised
us up prophets in Babylon,' and we will not come out; you must
not murmur if you feel what is to follow. And that such may know
upon what bottom they stand, let them read the 29th chapter of
Jeremiah 15-19.

Fourthly, Must Antichrist be destroyed? Then what mean they, who
were to appearance once come out, but now are going thither again?
If it cost Lot's wife dear for but looking back, shall not it cost
them much dearer, that are going back, that are gone back again?
and that, AFTER the angel had fled through the midst of heaven,
preaching the gospel to those that dwell on the earth? (Rev 14:6-10).
They that received the mark of the beast at first, before this
angel came forth, are when compared with these, excusable (Rev
13:16,17): Wherefore, they are not threatened with that smoking
wrath, as are these which are here under consideration.

You dread, that which is like to become of them that will be so
mad to run into an house, when fire is putting to the gunpowder
barrel, in order to its blowing up: Why thus do they, let their
pretended cause be what it will, that are returning again to Babel.
Are her plagues pleasant or easy to be borne? Or dost thou think
that God is at play with thee, and that he threateneth but in jest?
Her plagues are death, and mourning, and famine, and fire (Rev
18:8); are these things to be overlooked? And they that, as before
is hinted, shall receive the mark of the beast in their forehead,
or in their hand, and shall worship him, they, 'the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God' (Rev 14:10): And will this
be a delightsome draught? Remember how ill God took it, that his
people of old, in their hearts, though but in their hearts, went
back again into Egypt. You may say, but I have friends, relations,
and concerns in Babylon. And, I answer, so had Lot in Sodom (Gen
19:14-16); but for all that, he must either quickly come out, or
run the hazard of being burned there with them. But methinks, a
people that belong to God, should be willing to leave all to follow
him: Besides, his presence is promised at Jerusalem, there also
will he accept thy offerings.

Fifthly, Is Antichrist to be destroyed? Then let them that love
God, his Son, and his Zion, cry to God, that it may be hastened
in its time. One of the songs of Zion is, that Babylon shall be
destroyed. The cries of the souls of them that were slain for the
witness of Jesus is, that Babylon may be counted with, and that
their blood may be revenged upon her. The promise is, that Babylon
shall be destroyed: And do we hold our tongues? The church of God
will not flourish as it should, until Babylon is destroyed: The
world will never be in its right wits, until Babylon is destroyed:
The kingdom of Christ will never be set up, in and by his church,
as it ought, and shall, until Antichrist is destroyed: There will
never be peace upon earth till Antichrist is destroyed: And God
has promised that there shall be peace and truth, and glory, when
Babylon is destroyed: And do we hold our peace? Besides, your
innocency in suffering; your honesty towards God, in your testimony
for his truth; the substantial ground which you have for the bottom
of your faith, as to things controverted betwixt Antichrist and
you, will never be manifested as it will then; and so consequently,
you never so brought out to the light, and your enemies never so
put to shame as then. 'Then shame shall cover her that said unto
thee, Where is the Lord thy God?' Wherefore, as I said, cry unto
the Lord, keep not silence, give him no rest, let him not alone,
until he has delivered his miserable people out of the mouth of
this lion, and from the paw of this bear.

Sixthly, Is Antichrist to be destroyed? Then let us live in the
expectation of it; and let this be one of our songs in the house
of our pilgrimage. God bids his people, while in Babylon, to let
Jerusalem come into their mind (Jer 51:50), and writes to them that
then were in her, to acquaint them that he remembered them still,
and would assuredly deliver them from that place and state. And
wherefore doth he thus, but to beget an expectation in them of
their salvation and deliverance? (Jer 29:13,14). The Lord is so
pleased with the faith and expectation of his people, as to this,
that they seldom are herein concerned as they should, but he steps
in with them, and warms their hearts. The reason is, because the
faith of God's people, as to the downfall of Babylon, stands upon
as sure a foundation as doth the salvation of their souls; and that
next to that, God is as much delighted in what he has purposed to
do against Babylon, as in anything else in the earth: And therefore,
if you consider it well, the great and glorious promises that are
to be fulfilled on earth, are to be fulfilled when Antichrist is
dead and buried: These bits are too good even for his children
to have, so long as this dog is by, lest he should snatch at the
crumbs thereof; wherefore they are reserved until he is gone: For
thus saith the Lord, 'That after seventy years be accomplished at
Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word towards you,
in causing you to return to this place: For I know the thoughts
that I think toward you, saith the Lord; thoughts of peace, and
not of evil, to give you an expected end.' This is in Jeremiah
the 29th chapter, verses 10, 11 and in the 31st chapter he adds,
'Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and
shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and
for wine, and for oil, and of the young of the flock and of the
herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall
not sorrow any more at all. Then shall the virgin rejoice in the
dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their
mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice
from their sorrow. And I will satiate the soul of the priests
with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness,
saith the Lord' (verse 12-14). Again, in the 32nd chapter, still
speaking of the same thing, he saith, 'Yea, I will rejoice over
them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly
with my whole heart and with my whole soul' (verse 41).

I conclude this with that which I find in the 33rd chapter: 'And
I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have
sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby
they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me.
And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise, and an honour before
all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that
I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble, for all the goodness
and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it' (verse 8,9).

Seventhly, Must Antichrist be destroyed? Then this should make us
glad, when we see the signs of his fall presenting themselves to
our view. Indeed, the signs of his fall, or those that forerun
it, are terrible, and amazing to behold. But what of that, since
the wrinkles that are in their faces threaten not us but them?
A man is angry, and will punish; yea, and whets his sword, makes
his rod, and he speaks not a word, but blood, blood, is in it.
Indeed, this should make them that are concerned in this anger,
be afraid; (but the judgment is, they are fast asleep,) but what
is in all this of terror to them, for the pleading whose cause he
is so angry with the other? Nothing whereat the innocent should
be afraid. Cold blasts in November are not received with that
gentleness as are colder in March and April; for that these last
cold ones are but the farewell notes of a piercing winter; they also
bring with them the signs and tokens of a comfortable summer. Why,
the church is now at the rising of the year; let then the blasts
at present, or to come, be what they will, Antichrist is assuredly
drawing towards his downfall: And though the devil, knowing what
is to be done to him, and to his kingdom, shall so blind his
disciples, and fright the godly, do something like it upon the
church of Christ; yet we should look through these paper-winkers,22
and espy in all this, that fear, yea, certain terrible judgments
are following of him at the heels, by which not only the soul,
spirit, and life of Antichrist, but the body thereof; yea, body,
and soul, and head, are quickly to go down thither; from whence
they, as such, shall not arise again. Amen.


FOOTNOTES:


1 'Paper-winkers,' in every edition, except the first, which was
from the author's manuscript, has been altered to 'paper-windows.'
Bunyan's allusion is to the winkers, called by many 'blinkers,'
put by the side of a horse's eyes, to keep him under the complete
control of his driver--and by 'paper-winkers' the flimsy attempt
of Antichrist to hoodwink mankind by printed legends, miracles,
and absurd assumptions--it is one of the almost innumerable sparks
of wit, which render all the writings of Bunyan so entertaining
and strikingly instructive.--Ed.

2 The absurd act to compel uniformity in modes of worship, (14)
Charles II, had then recently passed; and when this treatise was
written, it desolated the country. This paved the way for the
glorious Revolution. The wicked fell into the pit which they had
dug for the righteous; the hopes of the Papists were crushed;
toleration to worship God was established. Let us follow Bunyan's
example, and attribute these mercies to a gracious God.--Ed.

3 When seven members of the first protesting church in London were
burned, a proclamation was made that no one should pray for them,
speak to them, nor once say, 'God help them.' But the church
pressed through the officers,--embraced and prayed for and with the
martyrs; and all the people with one consent said, Amen; to the
astonishment of the officers. And so these godly martyrs, praying
and praising God, sweetly ended their lives in the flames at
Smithfield.--Clarke's Martyrology, p. 500 and 516.--Ed.

4 Christian, read in these words your duty. Bunyan felt the tusks
of the wild boar, even to the peril of his life. He bore with
resignation all his sufferings, and was blest. Pity those whose
souls are under the yoke. Antichrist, if cruel to the body, is more
dangerous to the souls of men. Your prayers and exertions should
be redoubled until it is delivered up to the just judgment of the
Almighty. Come out, O Christian, and be separate from every system
which is stained with the blood and defiled with the soul-harrowing
groans of the saints of God.--Ed.

5 No man of the most refined education could have manifested
greater delicacy than Bunyan has in treating this subject, leaving
his reader to imagine whether the high-sounding titles, such as
'His Holiness,' 'God's Vicegerent upon earth,' which are given to
men, are consistent with the simplicity of the gospel or not. If
they are not, they belong to Antichrist, and will be consumed with
the stubble at the brightness of Christ's coming, when he shall
judge the earth.--Ed.

6 Antichristian statists of Antichrist. Those who weigh things to
place them in their relative order in the kingdom of Antichrist,
as the decree followed by the lions' den, &c.

7 The homilies read in the Church of England prior to the Reformation,
called 'The Festival,' contains the pith of these lying legends
and pretended miracles. Omitting the obscene parts, it ought to be
republished, to exhibit the absurdities of popery as it was then
seen in England.--Ed.

8 'The last stroke of the batter,' probably alludes to an engine
of war used by the ancients, called a battering-ram.--Ed.

9 Upon the Sunday sports being authorized, and pious ministers
persecuted for refusing to wear popish vestments in the reign of
James I, that godly Puritan, Mr. Carter, exclaimed, 'I have had
a longing desire to see or hear of the fall of Antichrist: but
I check myself. I shall go to heaven, and there news will come,
thick, thick, thick.'--Life by his Son, p. 13.

10 How remarkably has this come to pass since Bunyan's time; a slow
but sure progression. That darling ugly daughter, Intolerance, was
executed by the Act of Toleration. The impious Test by the repeal
of the Sacramental Test Act, &c., &c.--Ed.

11 There is great difficulty in estimating the weight of a talent.
Dr. Gill considers it about sixty pounds; this was the lesser
Roman talent. Michaelis estimates the Jewish talent at thirty-two
pounds and a half. The attic talent of gold used in Greece in
the time of Homer is estimated at less than an ounce. The safest
conclusion as to the weight of the hail-stones is, that they were
enormous, and fell with a velocity to crush all animals to instant
death.--Ed.

12 The reader must not misunderstand the words, 'The king kills her
body.' Bunyan does not in the slightest degree concede to kings or
nations a right to interfere with 'the soul' or religious principles
or practices--these are to be slain, if false, by persecution of
the preacher. Kings and nations will restore to the people the
immense property and revenue of which they have been plundered,
under the hollow knavish pretence of curing souls and forgiving
sins. THUS will human laws kill the body of Antichrist. Every
motive for professing to believe absurdities and contradictions
will be at an end, when neither rule nor honour, nor pelf is to
be gained by hypocrisy.--Ed.

13 This is a very expressive term, but better understood by Bunyan
the brazier than by many of his readers. It is well known to
those who live near a coppersmith's, when three or four athletic
men are keeping up, bout and bout, incessant blows upon a rivet,
until their object is accomplished.--Ed.

14 Protestant kings.

15 This Christian temper of Bunyan certainly saved him from much
suffering while under persecution. It probably saved his invaluable
life. But how deeply it increases the guilt of his persecutors,
to send such a man to a damp wretched prison, for more than twelve
years, because he dared not join in the worship established by
law; and after all this, to hear his prayers and good wishes to
his persecutors, ought to have cut them to the quick.--Ed.

16 Lord, what is man, to pretend to infallibility! His heart, be
he pope or pagan, is 'deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked.' Pope Sixtus V in 1589 issued his infallible Bible; but
the edition of Clement VIII, in 1592, differs much from that of
1589. Infallibles ought never to differ with each other; but how
often it has happened.--Ed.

17 These bloody massacres, to which Bunyan here alludes, were
attended with atrocities at which nature shudders. In France,
under a Bourbon and a Guise, the murder of hundreds of thousands
of pious men and women, with helpless infants, threw down every
barrier to the spread of infidelity, and a frightful reaction took
place at the Revolution. In Ireland, under a Stuart and a Bourbon,
still more frightful atrocities were perpetrated, and which were
severely punished by Cromwell and his Roundheads. Under a second
Stuart, awful wholesale murders were again committed, and punished
by William III; and the voice of the blood that was shed by
Antichrist, and the voices of people enslaved by prejudice, and
vindictive, ferocious enmity--these voices cry for vengeance, and
desolate that unhappy country.--Ed.

18 In the first examination of Lord Cobham (Fox, vi p. 732, edit.
1632) the gallant knight was asked by his bitter persecutor, what
he meant by 'the venom shed over the church'; his reply was, 'Your
possession and lordships.' For then cried an angel in the air--'Wo!
Wo! Wo! this day is venom shed into the church of God.--Rome is
the very nest of Antichrist--prelates, priests and monks are the
body; and these pild [bald, but query, pillaging] friars are the
tail, which covereth his most filthy part.' How peaceful and blessed
will be the church when ALL her ministers can glory with Paul,
in Acts 20:33,34.--Ed. 19 The principal cry of the traveling
peddlars was for broken or light money, to exchange for their
wares: now obsolete.--Ed.

20 Such has been the tendency of the antichristian church in
all ages; witness the cases of the Emperor Henry IV, Henry II of
England, and many others. The spirit and precept of Christianity,
on the contrary, is, while fearing God, to honour the king; and
that we be subject to principalities and powers, Titus 3:1; see
also Matthew 22:21; Romans 13:1-7.--Ed.

21 See Fox's Martyr, folio, vol. i., last leaf.--Ed.

22 'Paper-winkers,' in every edition, except the first, which was
from the author's manuscript, has been altered to 'paper-windows.'
Bunyan's allusion is to the winkers, called by many 'blinkers,'
put by the side of a horse's eyes, to keep him under the complete
control of his driver--and by 'paper-winkers' the flimsy attempt
of Antichrist to hoodwink mankind by printed legends, miracles,
and absurd assumptions--it is one of the almost innumerable sparks
of wit, which render all the writings of Bunyan so entertaining
and strikingly instructive.--Ed.

***

THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD, AND ETERNAL JUDGMENT:

OR, THE TRUTH OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODIES, BOTH OF GOOD AND
BAD AT THE LAST DAY: ASSERTED, AND PROVED BY GOD'S WORD.

ALSO, THE MANNER AND ORDER OF THEIR COMING FORTH OF THEIR GRAVES;
AS ALSO, WITH WHAT BODIES THEY DO ARISE. TOGETHER, WITH A DISCOURSE
OF THE LAST JUDGMENT, AND THE FINAL CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE WORLD.

BY JOHN BUNYAN, A SERVANT OF THE LORD'S CHRIST.

"Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed"--(1 Cor 15:51,52).

"Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation"--(John 5:28,29).



ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

This very important treatise, judging from the style in which it is
written, was, probably, one of the first books composed by Bunyan.
The form in which it is prepared, with minute divisions to assist
the memory, and its colloquial language, indicate that it was first
intended for the pulpit and then enlarged to form a more complete
treatise; while the frequent recurrence of the words "I say," shew
the unpolished style in which he was in the habit of committing
his thoughts to paper, when he became an author.

A good copy of what appears to be the first edition, is in the
British Museum, a small 8vo, without date--and from this, collated
with the reprint by C. Doe in Bunyan's works, 1691, the present
edition is published. Doe, in his catalogue of all Mr. Bunyan's
books, appended to the Heavenly Footman, 1690, states that "The
resurrection of the Dead, and eternal Judgment by John Bunyan, a
servant of the Lord's Christ, was first published in 1665." I have
not been able to discover any subsequent edition in a separate
volume.

The resurrection of the body is a subject of universal and deep
importance. It defies our reasoning powers, while it exalts our
ideas of the divine omnipotence. With God, all things revealed
in his word are not only possible, but certain of accomplishment.
The bodies of the saints, which are a part of the Redeemer's
purchase will be raised in heavenly and wondrous perfection; like
to the Saviour's glorious body. That body, which being transfigured
"did shine as the sun, and his raiment became as the light." That
body which, after his resurrection, might be touched, but which
could appear and disappear to mortal eyes; in the room at Emmaus,
or in a closed room filled with his disciples; could be touched,
yet vanish away; could eat with them on the sea shore, and could
ascend to heaven from the mount. Thus it was foretold by the prophet
and reiterated by the apostle--"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
hath prepared for them that love him" (Isa 64:4; 1 Cor 2:9). Not
one atom of our dust can be lost; a bright, a glorious anticipation
to the saints; but how solemn and awful a thought to those who die
without hope. Among Christians it is common to think and talk of
the happiness of the spirits of the just made perfect; but alas,
how seldom do we think or speak of the perfect bliss of our
whole nature, body, soul, and spirit--incorruptible, undefiled,
glorified--every part equally the object of the Saviour's purchase
and of his care.

This treatise, which will be ever new, and ever important, was
peculiarly required in Bunyan's early days. Under the protectorate,
the minds of men, which had been kept in slavery, became suddenly
emancipated from human creeds and formularies of public worship.
The personal attention of every one was then directed to the
Bible--the Lord's day was observed, men were chosen as ministers
not from high connections, but from deep and humble piety. Tens
of thousands became happy in a personal knowledge of divine truth.
At such a period, it must have happened that some evil spirits
would exalt themselves, and that even some serious inquirers would
draw strange conclusions from a misconception of divine truth;
and dimly see "men as trees walking." Among these there appeared
teachers, who, unable to comprehend how that body, which had gone
to dust, or in some cases had been reduced by fire to its primary
elements, and dispersed to the winds or waves, could be again
produced. They revived an ancient error, That the new birth was
the only resurrection from death; and consequently, that to those
who were born again, the resurrection was passed. The individuals
who promulgated these opinions, do not appear to have been associated
together as a sect, or a church. The greater number were called
in derision "ranters," and some "quakers." It is very probable,
that this treatise was intended as an antidote to these delusions.
We must not infer from the opinions of a few unworthy individuals,
who justly deserved censure, that Bunyan meant to reflect upon the
Society of Friends. This treatise was printed in 1665: but it was
not until 1675 that the Quakers' rules of discipline were first
published, and they from that time as a sect have been, in a high
degree, conformable to the morality and heavenly influences of
the gospel. But even before this, Fox, Crisp, Penn, Barclay, and
others, who afterwards formed the Society of Friends, had declared
their full belief in this doctrine. "The resurrection of the just
and unjust--the last judgment--heaven and hell as future rewards--we
believe and confess." "We believe the holy manhood of Christ to be
in heavenly glory." "We acknowledge a resurrection in order to
eternal recompence, and rest contented with that body which it
shall please God to give us." "We do firmly believe that besides
the resurrection of the soul from the death of sin, to a life of
righteousness while here, there will be a resurrection of the dead
hereafter, and that we must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ." Barclay, in his catechism, 1673, clearly asserts
Bunyan's own ideas of the resurrection. But in the face of these,
and a thousand similar declarations, the grossest calumnies were
asserted by a fanatic clergyman, Alexr. Ross, in his View of all
Religions:--"The Ranters are a sect of beasts that neither divide
the hoof, nor chew the cud; that is to say, very unclean ones.
They, like the Quakers, oppose forms and order (the form and order
of Common Prayer). To anatomize this monster: 1st, They hold that
God, Devils, Angels, Heaven, and Hell, are fictions. 2d, That
Moses, the Baptist, and Christ were impostors. 3d, That preaching
and praying is lying." 8vo., 1696, p. 273. And such wild slanders
were uttered occasionally against all dissenters, until a much
later period. Happily they are now better known, and the truths
of Christianity are more appreciated. I have been careful to guard
the reader upon this subject, lest it should be thought that Bunyan
had in any degree manifested the spirit of those, who even to the
present day misrepresent the opinions of the Quakers. This may
be occasioned by their distinguishing tenet--That the work of the
ministry is purely a labour of love, and ought not to be performed
for hire--derived from the command of Christ to his disciples,
"Freely ye have received, freely give." This, however, is no reason
that they should be, as to their general views of divine truth,
misrepresented and traduced.

Bunyan, at all times solemn and impressive, is peculiarly earnest
and searching in this treatise. The dead will arise involuntarily
and irresistibly--conscience uncontrolled, must testify the truth,
yea, all the truth to the condemnation of the soul and body,
unless cleansed from sin by faith in the Redeemer and the sacred
influences of the Holy Spirit. The books will be opened, and
every thought and word and action be seen inscribed in characters
legible to all. Every soul will be able to read and clearly to
understand those mysterious books--God's omniscient, his penetrating,
his universal sight of all things from the creation of the world
to the final consummation; and his perfect remembrance of all
that he saw--are one and the same. There is then no refuge, no
escape--the word depart impels obedience, and the sinner plunges
into eternal woe!! O that the living may lay these awful realities
to heart, and fly for refuge to the bosom of the Redeemer--he only
is able--he is willing to save to the uttermost all that come unto
God by him. And they who find in him a refuge from the storms of
life, shall hear his voice irresistibly impelling them to heaven,
"Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world."

O glorious hour! O blest abode! I shall be like and near my God! And
flesh and sin no more control The sacred pleasures of the soul.

May the divine blessing abundantly attend the reading of these
awful or joyful realities.

GEO. OFFOR.




PREFACE.

COURTEOUS READER,

Though this be a small treatise, yet it doth present thee with
things of the greatest and most weighty concernment, even with a
discourse of life and death to eternity: opening, and clearing,
by the scriptures of God, that the time is at hand, when, there
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust;
even of the bodies of both, from the graves where they are, or
shall be, at the approach of that day.

Thou hast also in these few lines, the order and manner of the
rising of these two sorts of people, wherein is shewed thee with
what body they shall then rise, as also their states and condition
at this day, with great clearness.

For here thou shalt see the truth, and manner of the terrible
judgment, the opening of the books, the examining of witnesses,
with a final conclusion upon good and bad. Which, I hope will be
profitable to thy soul that shall read it. For if thou art godly,
then here is that which will, through God's blessing, encourage
thee to go on in the faith of the truth of the gospel; but if thou
art ungodly, then here thou mayst meet with conviction: yea, and
that of what will be, without fail, thy end, at the end of the world:
whether thou continue in thy sins, or repent. If thou continue in
them, blackness, and darkness, and everlasting destruction; but
if thou repent, and believe the gospel, then light, and life, and
joy, and comfort, and glory, and happiness, and that to eternity.

Wherefore let me here beg these things at thy hand,

First, That thou take heed of that spirit of mockery that saith,
"Where is the promise of his coming?" (2 Peter 3:4,5).

Secondly, Take heed that thy heart be not overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
upon thee unawares (Luke 21:34,35).

Thirdly, But be diligent in making thy calling and election sure;
that thou in the day, of which thou shalt read more in this book,
be not found without that glorious righteousness that will then
stand thee in stead, and present thee before his glorious presence,
with exceeding joy. To him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus,
world without end. Amen.

JOHN BUNYAN.



OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD.

"BUT THIS I CONFESS UNTO THEE, THAT AFTER THE WAY WHICH THEY CALL
HERESY, SO WORSHIP I THE GOD OF MY FATHERS, BELIEVING ALL THINGS
WHICH ARE WRITTEN IN THE LAW AND IN THE PROPHETS: AND HAVE HOPE
TOWARD GOD, WHICH THEY THEMSELVES ALSO ALLOW, THAT THERE SHALL BE
A RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD, BOTH OF THE JUST AND UNJUST"--(Acts
24:14,15).

My discourse upon this text, will chiefly concern the resurrection
of the dead: wherefore to that I shall immediately apply myself,
not meddling with what else is couched in the words.

You see here, that Paul, being upon his arraignment, accused of
many things, by some that were violent for his blood; and being
licensed to speak for himself by the then heathen magistrate; he
doth in few words tell them, that as touching the crimes wherewith
they charged him, he was utterly faultless, only this he confessed,
that after that way which they call heresy, so he worshipped the
God of his fathers; believing all things that are written in the
law and the prophets, and that he had the same hope towards God,
which they themselves did allow, that there should be a resurrection
of the dead, both of the just and unjust.

Whence note by the way, that a hypocritical people, will persecute
the power of those truths in others, which themselves in words
profess. I have hopes towards God, and that, such a hope which
themselves do allow, and yet I am this day, and that for this very
thing, persecuted by them.

But to come to my purpose, "There shall be a resurrection of
the dead," &c. By these words, the apostle sheweth us what was
the substance of his doctrine, to wit, that there should be "a
resurrection of the dead;" and by these words also, what was the great
argument with his soul, to carry him through these temptations,
afflictions, reproaches, and necessities he met with in this
world, even the doctrine of a resurrection. I have hope towards
God, saith he, and there is my mind fixed; for there shall be "a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust." The reason
why I cannot do what these Jews would have me; also why I cannot
live as do the Gentiles, it is, because I have in my soul, the faith
of the resurrection. This is the doctrine I say, which makes me
fear to offend, and that is as an undergirder to my soul, whereby
I am kept from destruction and confusion, under all the storms and
tempests I here go through. In a word, this is it that hath more
awe upon my conscience than all the laws of men, with all the
penalties they inflict. "And herein do I exercise myself, to have
always a conscience void of offence toward God and toward men"
(verse 16).

Now here, seeing this doctrine of the resurrection of the dead hath
that power, both to bear up and to awe; both to encourage and to
keep within compass, the spirit and body of the people of God;
it will be requisite, and profitable for us, to inquire into the
true meaning and nature of this word, "the resurrection of the
dead."

And for the better compassing of this matter, I shall briefly
enquire,

First, What in this place is meant by the dead.

Secondly, What is meant by the resurrection.

Thirdly, Why the apostle doth here speak of the resurrection of the
dead as of a thing yet to come--"There shall be a resurrection of
the dead, both of the just and unjust."

First. The dead in scripture go under a five-fold consideration;
as,

1. Such as die a natural death, or as when a man ceaseth to be any
more in this world, as David, whom Peter tells us "is both dead
and buried, and his sepulchre is with us to this day" (Acts 2:29).

2. There is a people that are reckoned dead in trespasses and
sins, as those are, who never yet were translated from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan to God. Such, I say, who
yet never felt the power of the Word and Spirit of God, to raise
them from that state, to walk with him in the regeneration; making
a life out of Christ, and his present benefits (Eph 2:1,2; John
5:25).

3. There is a death seizeth men often after some measure of light
received from God, and some profession of the gospel of Christ. These,
for the certainty of their damnation, are said to be dead--dead,
twice dead, and plucked up by the roots (Jude 12).

4. There is in scripture mention made of a death to sin, and the
lusts of the flesh; this death is the beginning of true life and
happiness, and is a certain forerunner of a share in Christ, and
with him in another world (Rom 6:6-8; 2 Tim 2:11).

5. Lastly, There is also in the word, a relation of eternal death.
This is the death that those are in, and swallowed up of, that
go out of this world Godless, Christless, and graceless; dying
in sin, and so under the curse of the dreadful God; who, I say,
because they have missed of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Saviour in
this day of grace: are fallen into the gulf and jaws of eternal
death and misery, in the fire that never shall be quenched (Mark
9:43,44; Luke 16:23-26).

Now then, seeing there is death, or to be dead, taken under so many
considerations in the scripture; it is evident, that to be dead in
Christ, the text is not meant of them all: I then must distinguish,
and inquire which of these deaths it is, that here the apostle
did look for a resurrection from. (1.) then, It cannot be meant
a resurrection from eternal death, for from that there is no
redemption (Psa 49:8). (2.) Neither is it a resurrection from that
double death; for they that are in that, are past recovery also.
(3.) And as for those that are dead to sin, it is nonsense to say
there shall, or can be a resurrection from that: for that itself
is a resurrection; which resurrection also, the apostle had then
passed through: and also all the brethren, as he saith, You hath he
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins (Col 2:12,13,20).
And again, "If ye then be risen with Christ" (Col 3:1), and again,
"Wherein also ye are risen with him, through the faith of the
operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead" (Col 2:12).
(4.) The dead therefore in this scripture, must be understood
of those that have departed this life, that have body and soul
separated each from the other; and so the resurrection, a resurrection
of the body out of the grave; as Daniel saith, "Many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake" (Dan 12:2). And again,
"The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth," &c. (John 5:28,29).

Second. [What is meant by the resurrection.] The resurrection of
the just, then, is the rising of the bodies of the just, and the
resurrection of the unjust, the rising of their bodies, at the
last judgment. This also is the meaning of that saying of Paul to
Agrippa, "I stand," saith he, "and am judged for the hope of the
promise made of God unto our fathers" (Acts 26:6), which promise
at first began to be fulfilled in the resurrection of the body
of Christ (Acts 13:32,33), and hath its accomplishment, when the
dead, small and great, are raised out of their graves. Wherefore,
though Paul saith in the 13th of the Acts, it is already fulfilled;
yet here he saith, he hopes it shall come. "Which promise," saith
he, "our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope
to come" (Acts 26:7). As God told Daniel, saying, "go thy way,
till the end be: for thou shalt rest and stand in thy lot at the
end of the days" (Dan 12:13).

Christ is already risen, and therefore so far the promise is
fulfilled; but his saints are yet in their graves, and therefore
that part of the fulfilling of it is yet to come, as he saith,
"Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the dead?" (Acts 26:8).

Again, That it is the resurrection of the dead bodies of both
saints and sinners that is here inserted, it is further evident;
because the apostle saith, it is the resurrection, that the very
Pharisees themselves allowed. I have hope towards God, saith he,
which themselves also allow; then what that hope is, he in the
next words sheweth, namely, that there shall be a resurrection of
the dead, &c. Now we know, that the Pharisees did not allow of a
resurrection from a state of nature, to a state of grace, which is
the same with the new birth; but did confidently allow and teach,
that they were the children of Abraham, according to the flesh.
Yea, when any of them began to adhere, or incline to Christ's
doctrine in some things, yet the doctrine of the new birth, or
of being raised from a state of nature, to a state of grace, they
would very much stick at; though in the meantime, they utterly were
against the doctrine of the Sadducees, which denied the resurrection
of the body (John 3:1-9; 8:51-56; Acts 23:6-8).

Further, the resurrection here spoken of, must needs be the
resurrection of the body, because it is called, "a resurrection of
the dead, both of the just and unjust"--that is, of both saints and
sinners, according to the saying of Christ, "The hour is coming,
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection
of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation" (John 5:28,29).

Third. [The resurrection spoken of is a thing yet to come;] the
resurrection here mentioned, is a resurrection to come, not already
enjoyed, either by saints or sinners--"There shall be a resurrection
of the dead, both of the just and unjust." Now, I say, the
resurrection here being yet deferred by the just, and counted
also the resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust:
it must needs be the same resurrection that is spoken of by Job,
who saith, "So man lieth down, and riseth not: till the heavens be
no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep"
(Job 14:12).

Having thus, in few words, opened this scripture unto you, I shall
in the next place, for the further satisfaction of those that are
yet wavering, and for the refreshment of those that are strong
and steadfast, lay down before you, several undeniable scripture
demonstrations of the resurrection of the dead, both of the just,
and unjust.

FIRST, I shall first begin with,

THE RESURRECTION OF THE JUST.

First, The just must arise, because Christ is risen from the dead.
Christ is the head of the just, and they are the members of his
body; and because of this union, therefore the just must arise.
This is the apostle's own argument--"If Christ," saith he, "be
preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that
there is no resurrection of the dead? But if there be no resurrection
of the dead, then is Christ not risen" (1 Cor 15:12,13). Now,
I say, the reason why the apostle thus argueth the resurrection
from the dead, by the resurrection of Christ, it is, because the
saints, of whose resurrection he here chiefly discourseth, are in
their bodies, as well as in their souls, the members of Christ;
"Know ye not," saith he, "that your bodies are the members of
Christ" (1 Cor 6:15). A very weighty argument; for if a good man
be a member of Christ, then he must either be raised out of his
grave, or else sin and death must have power over a member of
Christ. I say again, if this body be not raised, then also Christ
is not a complete conqueror over his enemies; forasmuch as death
and the grave have still power over his members. "The last enemy
that shall be destroyed is death" (1 Cor 15:26). Now, though Christ
in his own person hath a complete conquest over death, &c., yet
death hath still power over the bodies of all that are in their
graves: now, I say, Christ being considered with relation to his
members, then he hath not yet a complete conquest over death,
neither will he, until they every one be brought forth of their
graves; for then, and not till then, shall that saying be every
way fulfilled, "Death is swallowed up in victory" (1 Cor 15:53,54).

Second, As there must be a resurrection of the just, because Christ
is their head, and they his members: so also, because the body
of the saints, as well as their soul, is the purchase of Christ's
blood. "Ye are bought with a price:" saith Paul; "therefore glorify
God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's" (1 Cor
6:20). Christ will not lose the purchase of his blood. O death,
saith Christ, I will have them; O grave, I will make thee let them
go; I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem
them from death. I have bought them, and they shall be mine. "O
death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction"
(Hosea 13:14): I say, though the power of the grave be invincible,
and death be "the king of terrors" (Job 18:14), yet he who hath
the keys of hell and of death at his girdle (Rev 1:18), to him
belongeth the issues from death. "He that is our God is the God
of salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death"
(Psa 68:20), and we, the price of his blood, shall be delivered.

Third, As the body is the member of Christ, and the price of his
blood: so it is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in us.
"What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost
which is in you,--and ye are not your own?" (1 Cor 6:19). The body
is no such ridiculous thing in the account of Christ as it was in
the account of the Sadducees. "The body is not for fornication,
but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body" (verse 13), and that
not only in this world, but that which is to come; wherefore he
saith, "God hath both raised up the Lord [Jesus,] and will also
raise us up by his own power"--that is, as he hath raised up the
body of Christ, so will he raise up ours also by Christ.

Fourth, The bodies of the just must arise again, because of that
similitude, that must be betwixt the body of the Lord Jesus Christ
and the bodies of the saints. "When he shall appear, we shall
be like him" (1 John 3:2). Now we have it abundantly manifest in
scripture, that the body of the Lord Jesus, was raised out of the
grave, caught up into heaven, and that it ever remaineth in the
holiest of all, a glorified body (Luke 24:3-7; 36-43; John 20:24-28;
Acts 1:2-11; 2:31; 17:30-32; Mark 16:6,7,19; Heb 7:24-26; 8:1-3;
10:12).

Now, I say, it would be very strange to me if Christ should be
raised, ascended, and glorified in that body; and yet that his
people should be with him, no otherwise than in their spirits;
especially, seeing that he in his resurrection, is said to be but
"the first-born from the dead, and the first-fruits of them that
sleep" (Col 1:18; 1 Cor 15:23). For we know, that a first-begotten
doth imply more sons, and that first-fruits do foreshew an
after-crop; wherefore we conclude, that "as in Adam all die, even
so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his own
order: Christ the first-fruits; afterward they that are Christ's
at his coming" (1 Cor 15:22,23).

And hence it is that the scripture saith, He "shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body" (Phil
3:21). And hence it is again, that the day of Christ is said to
be the day of the manifestation of the sons of God, and of the
redemption of our body (Rome 8:21-24), for then shall the saints
of God not only be, but appear as their Saviour, being delivered
from their graves, as he is from his, and glorified in their
bodies, as he is in his.

Fifth, There must be a resurrection of the body of the saints,
because the body, as well as the mind, hath been a deep sharer
in the afflictions that we meet with for the gospel's sake. Yea,
the body is ofttimes the greater sufferer, in all the calamities,
that for Christ's sake we here undergo; it is the body that feels
the stocks, the whip, hunger and cold, the fire and rack, and
a thousand calamities; it is the body in which we have the dying
marks of the Lord Jesus, "that the life also of Jesus might be
made manifest in our mortal1 flesh" (Gal 6:17; 2 Cor 4:11). God
is so just a God, and so merciful to his people, that though the
bodies of his saints should, through the malice of the enemy, be
never so dishonourably tortured, killed, and sown in the grave:
yet he will, as further will be shewn anon, raise it again in
incorruption, glory, and honour: as he saith also in another place,
that we who have continued with Christ in his temptations, that
have for his sake underwent the reproach and malice of the world,
to you, saith Christ. "I appoint a kingdom, as my Father hath
appointed unto me" (Luke 22:28,29). If we suffer, we shall also
reign with him (2 Tim 2:12): "and he that hateth his life in this
world shall keep it unto life eternal" (John 12:25). All this is
to be enjoyed, especially at the resurrection of the just. But,

Sixth, There must be a resurrection of the just, otherwise, there
will be the greatest disappointment on all sides that ever was,
since man had a being on the earth. A disappointment, I say,

1. Of the will of God--"And this is the Father's will which hath
sent me," saith Christ, "that of all which he hath given me I
should lose nothing, [not a dust,] but should raise it up again
at the last day" (John 6:39).

2. A disappointment of the power of God; for he that hath raised
up the Lord Jesus, doth also intend to raise us up by his power,
even our bodies; as Paul saith, "The body is not for fornication,
but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body. And God hath both
raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his power" (1
Cor 6:13,14).

3. If there should be no resurrection of the just, Christ also would
be wonderfully disappointed of the fruits of all his sufferings.
As I told you before, his people are the price of his blood, and
the members of his body, and he is now at the right hand of God,
"far above all principalities and powers, and every name that
is named," expecting till his enemies be made his footstool (Heb
1:13), and brought under the foot of the weakest saint; which will
not be, until the last enemy death is destroyed. We know that he
said, when he went away, that he would come again, and fetch all
his people to himself, even up into heaven, that where he is, there
we may be also (John 12:26; 14:1-3; 17:24). But, I say, how will
he be disappointed, if when he comes, the grave and death should
prevent and hinder him, and with its bars, keep down those, whom
he hath ransomed with his blood, from the power thereof.

4. If the bodies of the just arise [not] from the dead, then they
also will be disappointed. 'Tis true, the saints departed, have
far more fellowship and communion with God and the Lord Jesus,
than we have, or are not yet capable of having, they being in
paradise, and we in this world (Luke 23:43); but yet, I say for
all that, they are, though there, very much longing for the day
of the Lord's vengeance, which will be the day in which they will,
and must arise from the dead. This, I say, is the time that they
long for, when they cry under the altar, "How long, O Lord, holy
and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth?" (Rev 6:10,11). When they died, they died in
hope to "obtain a better resurrection" (Heb 11:35), and now they
are gone, they long till that day be come; till the day come, I
say, when the dead, even all the enemies of Christ, shall be judged;
for then will he give rewards to his servants the prophets, and
to his saints, and to all that fear his name, small and great (Rev
11:18).

5. If the just arise not, great disappointment also will be
to the saints yet alive in this world; for, notwithstanding they
have already received the first-fruits of the Spirit, yet they
wait, not only for more of that, but also for the resurrection,
redemption, and changing of this vile body. "For our conversation
is in heaven," saith Paul, "from whence also we look for the
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body,
that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body" (Rom 8:20-23;
Phil 3:20,21). But now, I say, if the body riseth not, then how
can it be made like to the glorious body of Christ Jesus: yea,
what a sad disappointment, infatuation, and delusion, are those
poor creatures under, that look, and that by scripture warrant,
for such a thing? They look for good, but behold evil; they expect
to be delivered in their whole man from every enemy; but lo, both
death and the grave, their great enemies, do swallow them up for
ever. But, beloved, be not deceived. "The needy shall not always
be forgotten, the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever"
(Psa 9:18). Saith Christ, He that seeth the Son, and believeth on
him that sent him, hath everlasting life, and I will raise him up
at the last day (John 6:40).

6. If the just arise not out of their graves, then also is every
grace of God in our souls defeated; for though the spirit of
devotion can put forth a feigned show of holiness with the denial
of the resurrection, yet every grace of God in the elect doth
prompt them forward to live as becomes the gospel, by pointing
at this day; as, (1.) 'Tis this that faith looks at, according as
it is written, "I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also
believe, and therefore speak; knowing that he which raised up the
Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us
with you" (2 Cor 4:13,14). (2.) Hope looks at this. "We," saith
Paul, "which have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves
groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
redemption of our body"--that is, we expect this by hope; "but
hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth," or hath in
present possession, "why doth he yet hope for?" (Rom 8:23,24).
(3.) The grace of self-denial also worketh by this doctrine--"If
after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus,
what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not?" (1 Cor 15:32). As
who should say, Wherefore do I deny myself of those mercies and
privileges that the men of this world enjoy? Why do not I also,
as well as they, shun persecution for the cross of Christ? If the
dead rise not, what shall I be the better for all my trouble that
here I meet with for the gospel of Christ? (4.) Both zeal and
patience, with all other the graces of the Spirit of God in our
hearts, are much, yea, chiefly encouraged, animated, and supported
by this doctrine; as James saith, "Be patient, therefore, brethren,
unto the coming of the Lord," for then shall the dead be raised (1
Thess 4:16,17). "Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious
fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive
the early and latter rain. Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts;
for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh" (James 5:7,8).

Seventh, The doctrine of the resurrection of the just, must needs
be a certain truth of God, if we consider the devilish, and
satanical errors and absurdities that must unavoidably follow the
denial thereof; as, he that holdeth no resurrection of our body,
he denieth the resurrection of the body of Christ. This is the
Spirit's own doctrine--"For if the dead rise not, then is not
Christ raised" (1 Cor 15:16). He that denieth the resurrection
of the members, denieth the resurrection of the head; for seeing
the resurrection of the saints is proved by the resurrection of
Christ, he that doth deny the resurrection of the saints, must
needs deny the resurrection of Christ, that proves it. Now this
error, as it is in itself destructive to all Christian religion:
so it, like an adder, carrieth within its bowels, many other alike
devilish and filthy; as,

1. He that denieth the resurrection of the saints, he concludeth,
that to preach deliverance from sin and death, it is vain preaching;
for how can he be freed of sin, that is swallowed up for ever
of death and the grave? as he most certainly is, that is always
contained therein, as Paul saith, "If Christ be not risen," whose
resurrection is the ground of ours, "then is our preaching vain,
and your faith is also vain" (1 Cor 15:14), then we preach fables,
and you receive them for truth.

2. This error, casteth the lie in the face of God, of Christ,
and the Scriptures--"Yea, and we," saith Paul, "are found false
witnesses of God; because we have testified of God that he raised
up Christ:--if so be that the dead rise not" (1 Cor 15:15).
Mark, before he said, Christ in his resurrection, doth prove our
resurrection; but now he saith, that our resurrection will prove
the truth of his; and indeed both are true; for as by Christ's
rising, ours is affirmed; so by ours, his is demonstrated.

3. The denial of the resurrection, it also damneth all those that
have departed this world in the faith of this doctrine. "If Christ
be not raised," (as if he is not, we rise not, then is not only)
your faith vain, ye are yet in your sins (that are alive,) but
"then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished"
(1 Cor 15:17,18).

4. He that denieth the resurrection of the just, he concludeth, that
the Christian is of all men the most miserable. Mark the words:
"If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable" (1 Cor 15:19). First of all, men the most miserable,
because we let go present enjoyments for those that will never
come, "if the dead rise not." Of all men most miserable, because
our faith, our hope, our joy, and peace, are all but a lie, "if
the dead rise not." But you will say, he that giveth up himself
to God shall have comfort in this life. Ah! but "if the dead rise
not," all our comfort that now we think we have from God, will
then be found presumption and madness, because we believe, that
God hath so loved us, as to have us in his day, in body and soul,
to heaven: which will be nothing so, if the dead rise not. If in
this life only, we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable. Poor Christian! thou that lookest for the blessed hope
of the resurrection of the body, at the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, how wilt thou be deceived,
if the dead rise not! "But now is Christ risen from the dead, and
become the first-fruits of them that slept. For since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead" (1 Cor
15:20,21).

5. But again; he that denieth the resurrection of the dead, he
setteth open a flood-gate to all manner of impiety; he cutteth the
throat of a truly holy life, and layeth the reins upon the neck
of the most outrageous lusts; for if the dead rise not, let us
eat and drink; that is, do anything, though never so diabolical
and hellish; "let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die" (1 Cor
15:32), and there is an end of us; we shall not arise again, to
receive either evil or good.

6. To deny this resurrection, nay, if a man do but say, it is past
either with him or any Christian: his so saying tendeth directly
to the destruction and overthrow of the faith of them that hear
him; and is so far from being according to the doctrine of God,
that it eateth out good and wholesome doctrine even as cankers
eat the face and flesh of a man. How ill-favouredly do they look,
that have their nose and lips eaten off with the canker? Even so
badly doth the doctrine of no resurrection of the dead, look in
the eyes of God, Christ, saints, and scripture (2 Tim 2:18).

7. I conclude then, that to deny the resurrection of the bodies of
the just, it argueth,

(1.) Great ignorance of God, ignorant of his power to raise, ignorant
of his promise to raise, ignorant of his faithfulness to raise;
and that both to himself, Son, and saints, as I shewed before.
Therefore saith Paul to those that were thus deluded, "Awake to
righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God.
I speak this to your shame" (1 Cor 15:34). As if he had said, Do
you profess Christianity? and do you question the resurrection
of the body? Do you now know, that the resurrection of the body,
and glory to follow, is the very quintessence of the gospel of
Jesus Christ? Are you ignorant of the resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, and do you question the power and faithfulness of God,
both to his Son and his saints; because you say, there shall be
no resurrection of the dead? You are ignorant of God; of what he
can do, of what he will do, and of what he will by doing glorify
himself.

(2.) As it argueth very great ignorance of God's power, faithfulness,
&c., so it argueth gross ignorance of the tenor and current of
the scriptures; for "as touching the dead, that they rise: have
ye not read in the book of Moses [saith Christ] how in the bush,
God spake unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not the God of the dead, but
the God of the living: ye therefore do greatly err" (Mark 12:26,27).

To be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, it is to be understood
of his being their God under a new covenant consideration; as he
saith, "I will be their God, and they shall be my people." Now,
thus he is not the God of the dead--that is, of those that perish,
whether they be angels or men (Heb 8:10,11; John 8:42; 1 John
3:8-10; Hosea 6:2; Col 3:4; Eph 1:4).

Now, I say, they that are the children of God, as Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, they are counted the living under a threefold
consideration--(a.) In their Lord and head, and thus all the elect
may be said to live; for they are from eternity chosen in him, who
also is their life, though possibly many of them yet unconverted.
I say, yet Christ is their life, by the eternal purpose of God.
(b.) The children of the new covenant, do live both in their spirits
in glory, by open vision, and here by faith and the continual
communication of grace from Christ into their souls (Gal 2:20).
(c.) They live also with respect to their rising again; for God
"calleth those things which be not as though they were" (Rom 4:17).
To be born, dead, buried, risen, and ascended, are all present with
God, he liveth not by time, as we do--a thousand years to him are
but as the day that is past. And again, "One day is as a thousand
years" (2 Peter 3:8). Eternity, which is God himself, admitteth of
no first, second, and third; all things are naked and bare before
him, and present with him (Heb 4:13; Isa 46:9,10); all his live
unto him. There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the
just and unjust (Rom 8:29-34).

A resurrection--of what? Of that which is sown, or of that which
was never sown? If of that which is sown, then it must be either
of that nature that was sown, or else of the corruption that
cleaveth to it; but it is the nature, and not the corruption that
cleaveth unto it, that riseth again. And verily, the very term
"resurrection" is a forcible argument to prove the dead shall come
forth of their graves; for the Holy Ghost hath always spoken more
properly than to say, "There shall be a resurrection of the dead,
both of the just and unjust;" when yet neither the good nor the
bad shall come forth of their graves, but rather something else
to delude the world withal.

Having thus in few words, shewed you the truth of the resurrection
of the dead, I now come,

SECOND--To the manner of their rising.

THE MANNER OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE JUST.

And FIRST of the just.

The apostle, when he had in the fifteenth of the 1st of the
Corinthians proved the truth and certainty of the resurrection,
he descends to the discovery of the manner of it; and to the end,
he might remove those foolish scruples that attend the hearts of
the ignorant, he begins with one of their questions--"But some man
will say," saith he, "How are the dead raised up? and with what
body do they come?" (verse 35). To which he answereth,

First, By a similitude of seed, that is sown in the earth. In which
similitude, he inserteth three things--

1. That our reviving or rising, must be after death--"That which
thou sowest is not quickened except it die" (verse 36).

2. That at our rising, we shall not only revive and live, but
be changed into a far more glorious state than when we were sown.
"That which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
be," &c. "But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him" (verse
38)--that is, he giveth the body more splendour, lustre, and beauty
at its resurrection. But,

3. Neither its quickening, not yet its transcendent splendour, shall
hinder it from being the same body--as to the nature of it--that
was sown in the earth; for as God giveth it a body, for honour
and splendour as it pleaseth him, so "to every seed his own body"
(verse 38).

And, indeed, this similitude by which he here reasoneth the manner of
the resurrection of the just, is very natural, and fitly suiteth
each particular; for, as to its burial--(1.) The corn of wheat
is first dead, and after sown and buried in the earth; and so is
the body of man. (2.) After the corn is thus dead and buried, then
it quickeneth and reviveth to life: so also shall it be with our
body; for after it is laid in the grave and buried, it shall then
quicken, rise, and revive.

Again, as to the manner of its change in its rising, this similitude
also doth fitly suit; as,

It is sown a dead corn; it is raised a living one. It is sown dry,
and without comeliness; it riseth green and beautiful. It is sown
a single corn; it riseth a full ear. It is sown in its husk; but
in its rising it leaveth that husk behind it.

Further, though the kernel thus die, be buried, and meet with all
this change and alteration in these things, yet none of them can
cause the nature of the kernel to cease--it is wheat still. Wheat
was sown and wheat ariseth; only it was sown dead, dry, and barren
wheat; and riseth living, beautiful, and fruitful wheat. It hath
this alteration, then, that it doth greatly change its resemblance,
though yet it hath this power, as still to retain its own nature.
God giveth it a body as it pleaseth him, "but to every seed his
own body."

The apostle having thus presented the manner of the resurrection of
the saints by the nature of seed sown and rising again; he proceedeth,

Second, for further illustration, to three more similitudes--The
first is, to shew us the variety and glory of flesh. The second
is, to shew us the difference of glory that is between heavenly
bodies, and those that are earthy. The third is, to shew us the
difference that is between the glory of the light of the sun, from
that of the moon; and also how one star differeth from another in
glory: and then concludeth, "so is the resurrection of the dead"
(1 Cor 15:39-43). As who should say, at the resurrection of the
bodies, they will be abundantly more altered and changed, than if
the flesh of beasts and fowls were made as noble as the flesh of
men; or the bodies of earth, were made as excellent as the heavenly
bodies, or as if the glory of the moon should be made as bright,
and as clear as the glory of the sun; or as if the glory of the
least star was as glorious, and as shining, as the biggest in the
firmament of heaven.

It is a resurrection indeed, a resurrection every way. The body
ariseth, as to the nature of it, the self-same nature; but as to
the manner of it; how far transcendent is it! There is a poor,
dry, wrinkled kernel cast into the ground, and there it lieth, and
swelleth, breaketh, and, one would think, perisheth; but behold,
it receiveth life, it chitteth,2 it putteth forth a blade, and
groweth into a stalk, there also appeareth an ear; it also sweetly
blossoms, with a full kernel in the ear: it is the same wheat, yet
behold how the form and fashion of that which now ariseth, doth
differ from that which then was sown; its glory also when 'twas
sown, is no glory, when compared with that in which it riseth.
And yet it is the same that riseth that was sown, and no other;
though the same after a far more glorious manner; not the same with
its husk, but without it. Our bran shall be left behind us when we
rise again. The comparison also between the bodies heavenly and
bodies earthly holds forth the same--"The glory of the celestial
is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another." Now mark
it; he doth not speak here of the natures of each of these bodies;
but of the transcendent glory of one above another. "The glory
of the heavenly is one, and the glory of the earthly is another."
Wherefore I say, at our rising, we shall not change our nature,
but our glory; we shall be equal to the angels (Luke 20:36), not
with respect to their nature, but glory. The nature also of the
moon is one thing, and the glory of the moon is another; and so
one star also differeth from another in glory.

A beggar hath the same nature as a king, and gold in the ore, the
same nature with that which is best refined; but the beggar hath
not the same glory with the king, nor yet the gold in ore, the
same glory with that which is refined. But our state will be far
more altered than any of these in the days when we, like so many
suns in the firmament of heaven, arise out of the heart and bowels
of the earth.

These things thus considered do shew you how vainly they argue,
that say, our human nature consisting of body and soul, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, and also how far from their purpose,
that saying of the apostle is, which saith, that "flesh and blood
shall not inherit the kingdom of God." And now also, because I am
fallen upon the objection itself, I shall not pass it, but with
a short dash at it. Wherefore reader, whoever thou art, consider
that frequently in scripture the words "flesh" and "blood," as
also in the place alleged, are not to be understood of that matter
which God made; which flesh cleaveth to our bones, and blood runs
in our veins: but is taken for that corruption, weakness, mortality,
and evil that cleaveth to it; which weakness and corruption,
because it possesseth all men, and also wholly ruleth where the
soul is unconverted; therefore it beareth the name of that which
is ruled and acted by it--to wit, our whole man, consisting of
body and soul; yet, I say, is a thing distinct from that flesh and
blood which is essential to our being, and without which we are
no men. As, for instance, he that is Christ's, saith Paul, "hath
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts" (Gal 5:24),
Who is so vain as to think that the apostle by these words, should
mean our material flesh that hangeth on our bones, and that is
mixed with our natural blood, sinews, and veins; and not rather
of that inward fountain of sin, corruption, and wickedness, which
in another place he calleth "the old man," with his "deceitful
lusts" (Eph 4:22). Again, "The flesh lusteth against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh." Is it our flesh that hangeth
on our bones, which lusteth against the spirit? and that also
against which the spirit lusteth? Certainly, if the spirit lusteth
against our material flesh, then it is our duty not to nourish it
at all, because, by nourishing of it we nourish that against which
the Spirit of God fighteth, and warreth. Nay, if the spirit lust
against the flesh on our bones simply considered as flesh; and if
it be our duty to follow the Spirit, as it is, then we must needs
kill ourselves, or cut our flesh from our bones. For whatever the
Spirit of God lusteth against, it must be destroyed; yea, it is
our duty with all speed to destroy it. But wilt thou know, O vain
man, that by flesh here is to be understood, not the nature that
God hath made, but the corrupt apprehension, and wisdom, with
those inclinations to evil, that lodge within us, which in another
place are called the "wisdom of the flesh," yea, in plain terms,
"flesh and blood," where Christ saith, "Flesh and blood hath not
revealed [this] unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven" (Matt
16:17).

Nay, observe it, all these places, with many others, do rather point
at a corrupt soul, than a corrupt body; for, indeed, sin and all
spiritual wickedness, they have their seat in the heart and soul
of a man, and by their using this or that member of the body, so
defile the man; the weaknesses of the body, or that attend our
material flesh and blood, they are weaknesses of another kind, as
sickness, aches, pains, sores, wounds, defection of members, &c.
Wherefore, where you read of flesh and blood, as rejected of God;
especially, when it speaks of the flesh and blood of saints, you
are not to understand it as meant of the flesh, which is their
proper human nature, but of that weakness which cleaveth to it.

Paul in another place, reckoneth up the works of the flesh, in many
things, as in witchcraft, hatred, variance, strife, emulation,
fornication, and many others. But can any imagine, that he there
should strike at that flesh which hangeth on our bones, or rather
at that malignity and rebellion that is in the mind of man against
the Lord, by reason of which the members of the body are used
this way, and also sometimes that, to accomplish its most filthy
and abusive deeds (Gal 5:17-21). "They were--enemies in [their]
mind by wicked works" (Col 1:21).

Thus you see that "flesh and blood" is not to be taken always for
the flesh that is upon our hands, and feet, and other parts of our
body; but for that sin, weakness, and infirmity, that cleaveth to
our whole man.

Further then, touching our real substantial flesh, it may be either
considered as God's creature purely, or as corrupted with sin and
infirmity. Now if you consider it as corrupted, so it shall not
inherit the kingdom of God: but yet consider it as God's creature,
and so all that God hath converted to himself, through Jesus Christ,
shall, even with that body when changed, inherit the kingdom of
God. The woman whose clothes are foul, can yet distinguish between
the dirt and the cloth on which it hangeth; and so deals God with
us. 'Tis true, there is not one saint, but while he liveth here,
his body is arrayed and infected with many corrupt and filthy
things, as touching bodily weaknesses; yea, and also with many
sinful infirmities, by reason of that body of sin and death that
yet remains in us: but yet God, I say, distinguisheth between
our weaknesses, and his workmanship, and can tell how to save the
whole man of his people, while he is destroying the corruption
and weakness that cleaveth to them.

And now to return to the place objected--"Flesh and blood shall
not inherit the kingdom of God." It cannot be truly understood,
that that flesh which is man's nature shall not enter the kingdom;
for then, as I said before, Christ must lose his members, the
purchase of his blood, the vessels and temples of his Spirit; for
all this is our body. Again, then Christ also, in that his body,
which is also our flesh and blood, is not in glory, contrary to the
whole current of the New Testament (Heb 2:14,15; 7:24,25; 8;3,4;
10:10-12; Rev 1:18; 2:8).

Yea, it would be nonsense to say, there should be a resurrection,
and that our vile body shall be changed, "and made like to the
glorious body of the Son of God;" if this body do not at all rise
again, but some other thing, which is not in us, and our nature.
But to be short; the apostle here, when he saith, "Flesh and
blood cannot inherit," &c., speaks properly of that mortality
and weakness, that now attends our whole man, and not of our real
substantial body itself. For after he had said, "Flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God," he adds, "neither doth corruption
inherit incorruption," which two sayings are answerable to what
he presently adds, saying, "Behold, I shew you a mystery; we shall
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound,
and the dead"--mark, "the dead shall be raised incorruptible"--that
is, the dead shall be so raised as that in their rising, incorruption
shall possess them instead of corruption, and immortality instead
of that mortality that descended to the grave with them,--"for this
corruptible"--mark, this corruptible--"must put on incorruption,
and this mortal must put on immortality." Mark, I say, it is
this corruptible, and this mortal, that must be raised, though
not corruptible and mortal, as it was buried; but immortal and
incorruptible; it shall leave its grave-clothes of corruption and
mortality behind it (1 Cor 15:50-53).

THIRD. The manner of which their rising, the apostle doth more
distinctly branch out a little above in four particulars, which
particulars are these that follow--1. It is sown in corruption;
it is raised in incorruption. 2. It is sown in dishonour, it is
raised in glory. 3. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power.
4. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body (1
Cor 15).

1. It is raised in incorruption. We are brought into this world by
sin and corruption; corruption is our father, and in sin did our
mother conceive us (Job 17:14; Psa 51:5). And hence it is that we
have our life, not only like a span, shadow, or post, for shortness,
but also, that it is attended with so much vanity and vexation of
spirit. But now being raised from the dead incorruptible, which
is also called a begetting and birth, these things that now in
our life annoy us, and at last take away our life, are effectually
destroyed; and therefore we live for ever, as saith the Spirit--"And
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain: for the former things," that is,
all our corruptibleness, "are passed away" (Rev 21:4).

There shall be in our resurrection no corruption, either of body
or of soul; no weakness, nor sickness, nor anything tending that
way; as he saith, He will present us "to himself a glorious church,
not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing" (Eph 5:27).
Therefore, when he saith it is raised in incorruption, it is as
if he had said, It is impossible that they should ever sin more,
be sick more, sorrow more, or die more. "They which shall be counted
worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead,
neither marry, nor are given in marriage;" though 'twas thus with
them in this world; "neither can they die any more, for they are
equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the
children of the resurrection" (Luke 20:35, 36).

2. It is raised in glory. The dishonour that doth attend the
saint at his departing this world, it is very great--"he is sown
in dishonour;" he is so loathsome at his death, that his dearest
friends are weary of him, stop their noses at him, see no beauty
in him, nor set any price upon him, (I speak nothing here how
some of them are hanged, starved, banished, and so die, torn to
pieces, and not suffered to be put into graves,) but it is raised
in glory. Glory is the sweetness, comeliness, purity, and perfection
of a thing. The light is the glory of the sun, strength is the
glory of youth, and grey hairs are the glory of old age--that is,
it is the excellency of these things, and that which makes them
shine (1 Cor 15:40,41; Prov 20:29).

Therefore, to arise in glory, it is first to arise in all the
beauty, and utmost completeness that is possible to possess a human
creature; I say, in all its features and members, inconceivably
beautiful. Sin and corruption have made mad work in our bodies as
well as in our souls. 'Tis sin commonly that is the cause of all
the deformity and ill-favouredness that now cleaveth to us, and
that also rendereth us so dishonourable at our death; but now at
our rising, we being raised incorruptible, we shall appear in such
perfections, and that of all sorts, belonging to the body, that
all the beauty and comeliness, sweetness and amiableness, that
hath at any time been in this world, it shall be swallowed up a
thousand times told with this glory. The Psalmist saith of Christ
that "he was fairer than the children of men" (Psa 45:2), and
that, as I believe, in his outward man, as well as in his inward
part. He was the exactest, purest, completest, and beautifulest
creature that ever God made, till his visage was so marred by his
persecutions; for in all things he had and shall have the pre-eminence
(Isa 52:14; Col 1:18). Why, our bodies at our resurrection will
not only be as free from sin, as his was before he died, but also
as free from all other infirmities as he was after he was raised
again. In a word, if incorruptibleness can put a beauty upon our
bodies when they arise, we shall have it. There shall be no lame
legs, nor crump shoulders, no bleared eyes, nor yet wrinkled
faces--He "shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body" (Phil 3:21).

Again, all the glory that a glorified soul can help this body to,
it at this day shall enjoy. That soul that hath been these hundreds
or thousands of years in the heavens, soaking in the bosom of
Christ, it shall in a moment come spangling into the body again,
and inhabit every member and vein of the body, as it did before
its departure. That Spirit of God also that took its leave of the
body when it went to the grave, shall now in all perfection dwell
in this body again; I tell you, the body at this day will shine
brighter than the face of Moses or Stephen, even as bright as the
sun, the stars, and angels. "When Christ who is our life, shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory" (Exo 34:29,35;
Acts 6:15; Dan 12:3; Matt 13:43; Luke 20:36; Col 3:3,4).

3. It is raised in power. While we are here, we are attended with
so many weaknesses and infirmities, that in time the least sin or
sickness is too hard for us, and taketh away both our strength,
our beauty, our days, our breath, and life, and all (Job 38:17).
But behold, we are raised in power, in that power that all these
things are as far below us as a grasshopper is below a giant; at
the first appearance of us the world will tremble.

Behold, the gates of death and the bars of the grave are now carried
away on our shoulders, as Samson carried away the gates of the city
(Judg 16:3). Death quaketh, and destruction falleth down dead at
our feet: What, then, can stand before us? We shall then carry
that grace, majesty, terror, and commanding power in our souls that
our countenances shall be like lightning3 (Compare Luke 20:16 with
Matthew 28:2,3). "For this corruptible must put on incorruption,
and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put
on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory" (1 Cor 15:53,54).

4. It is raised a spiritual body. This is the last particular,
and is indeed the reason of the other three; it is an incorruptible
body, because it is a spiritual one; it is a glorious body,
because it is a spiritual one; it doth rise in power, because it
is a spiritual body. When the body is buried, or sown in the earth,
it is a body corruptible, dishonourable, weak, and natural; but
when it ariseth, it doth rise incorruptible, glorious, powerful,
and spiritual; so that so far as incorruption is above corruption,
glory above dishonour, power above weakness, and spiritual above
natural; so great an alteration will there be in our body, when
raised again. And yet it is this body and not another; this in
nature, though changed into a far more glorious state, a thousand
times further than if a hoggard4 was changed to be an emperor.
Mark, "it is sown a natural body;" a very fit word; for though
there dwell never so much of the Spirit and grace of God in it
while it liveth, yet so soon as the soul is separate from it, so
soon also doth the Spirit of God separate from it, and so will
continue while the day of its rising be come. Therefore, it is
laid into the earth a mere lump of man's nature--"It is sown a
natural body;" but now at the day when "the heavens be no more,"
as Job saith (14:12), then the trump shall sound, even the trump
of God, and, in a moment, the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
glorious, and spiritual (1 Cor 15:52; 1 Thess 4:16,17). So that
I say, the body when it ariseth, will be so swallowed up of life
and immortality, that it will be, as if it had lost its own human
nature; though, in truth, the same substantial real nature is
every whit there still. 'Tis the same it that riseth, that was
sown; "It is sown," "it is raised;" "it is sown," "it is raised,"
saith the apostle. You know, that things which are candied, by the
art of the apothecary, they are so swallowed up with the sweetness
and virtue of that in which they are candied, that they are now,
as though they had no other nature, than that in which they are
boiled: when yet, in truth, the thing candied doth still retain
its own proper nature and essence; though by virtue of its being
candied, it loseth its former sourness, bitterness, stinking,
smell, or the like. Just thus, at the last day, it will be with
our bodies: we shall be so candied, by being swallowed up of life,
as before is shewed, that we shall be, as if we were all spirit,
when in truth, it is but this body that is swallowed up of life.
And it must needs be, that our nature still remain, otherwise it
cannot be us that shall be in heaven, but something besides us.
Let us lose our proper human nature, and we lose absolutely our
being, and so are annihilated into nothing. Wherefore it, the same
it, that is sown a natural body, it shall rise a spiritual body.

But again, as I said, concerning things that are candied; our body,
when thus risen, it shall lose all that sourness and stink, that
now, by reason of sin and infirmity, cleaveth to it: neither shall
its lumpishness, or unwieldiness, be any impediment to its acting
after the manner of angels. Christ hath shewed us, what our body
at our resurrection shall be, by shewing of us, in his word, what
his body was, at and after, his resurrection. We read, that his
body, after he was risen from the dead, though it yet retained
the very same flesh and bones that did hang upon the cross, yet
how angelical was it at all times, upon all occasions! He could
come in to his disciples with that very body, when the doors were
shut upon them: He could, at pleasure, to their amazement, appear
in the twinkling of an eye, in the midst of them: he could be visible
and invisible as he pleased, when he sat at meat with them: in a
word, he could pass and repass, ascend and descend in that body,
with far more pleasure and ease, than the bird by the art of her
wing (Luke 24:31,32,36-42,50,51; John 20:19,24-26; Acts 1:1-12;
Mark 16:19; Eph 4:7-10).

Now, I say, as we have in this world borne the image of our first
father; so, at that day, we shall have the image of Jesus Christ,
and be as he is--"As is the earthy, such are they also that
are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are
heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall
also, (at our resurrection,) bear the image of the heavenly" (1
Cor 15:48,49). It is so in part now, but shall so be in perfection
then.

To mount up to heaven, and to descend again at pleasure, shall, with
us, in that day, be ordinary. If there were ten thousand bars of
iron, or walls of brass, to separate between us, and our pleasure
and desire, at that day, they should as easily be pierced by us,
as is the cobweb, or air by the beams of the sun: And the reason
is, because to the Spirit, wherewith we shall be inconceivably
filled at that day, nothing is impossible (Matt 17:20); and the
working of it at that day, shall be in that nature and measure
as to swallow up all impossibilities. He "shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body,"--now
mark, "according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue
all things unto himself" (Phil 3:21). As who should say, I know
that there are many things, that in this world hinder us from having
our bodies like the body of Christ; but when God shall raise us
from the dead, because he will then have our body like the body
of his Son; He will stretch forth such a power to work upon, and
in our body, that he will remove all impossibilities and hindrances.

Nay, further, we do not only see what operation the Spirit will have
in our body, by the carriage of Christ, after his resurrection;
but even by many a saint before their death. The Spirit used to
catch Elijah away, no man could tell whither. It carried Ezekiel
hither and thither: It carried Christ from the top of the pinnacle
of the temple into Galilee; through it he walked on the sea; the
Spirit caught away Philip from the eunuch, and carried him as far
as Azotus (1 Kings 18:11,12; 2 Kings 2:11; Eze 3:14; Luke 4:14;
Matt 14:25; Acts 8:39,40).

Thus the great God hath given us a taste of the power and glory that
is in himself, and how easily it will help us, by its possessing
5 of us at the resurrection, to act and do like angels; as Christ
saith, They that shall be counted worthy of that world, and of
the resurrection from the dead, they shall not die, but be equal
to the angels (Luke 21:36).

Further, as the body by being thus spiritualized, shall be as I
have said; so again it must needs be, that hereby all the service
of the body, and faculties of the soul, must be infinitely enlarged
also. Now "we shall see him as he is," and now we shall know even
as we are known (1 John 3:2; 1 Cor 13:12).

First, Now we shall see him; to wit, Christ in his glory; not by
revelation only, as we do now, but then face to face; and he will
have us with him to this very end (John 17:24). Though John was
in the Spirit when he had the vision of Christ, yet it made him
fall at his feet as dead (Rev 1:17); and also turned Daniels'
beauty into corruption (Dan 10:8). It was so glorious, and so
overweighing a glory, that he appeared in; but we shall, at the
day of our resurrection, be so furnished, that we shall with the
eagle, be able to look upon the sun in his strength: we shall
then, I say, "see Him as he is," who now is in the light, that no
eye hath seen, nor any man can see till that day (1 Tim 6:16).

Now we shall see into all things; there shall not be anything hid
from us; there shall not be a saint, a prophet, or saved soul,
small or great, but we shall then perfectly know them. Also, all
the works of creation, election, and redemption, and shall see
and know as thoroughly, all the things of heaven, and earth, and
hell, even as perfectly, as now we know our A, B, C. For the Spirit,
with which we shall in every cranny of soul and body be filled,
I say, "searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God" (1 Cor
2:10). We see what strange things have been known by the prophets
and saints of God, and that when they knew but "in part."

Abraham could, by it, tell to a day, how long his seed should be
under persecution in Egypt (Gen 15:13); Elisha, by it, could tell
what was done in the king of Assyria's bed-chamber (2 Kings 6:12);
Ahijah could know by this, Jeroboam's wife, so soon, yea before
her feet entered within his door, though he saw her not (1 Kings
14:1-6).

The prophet of Judah could tell by this, what God would do to Bethel,
for the idolatry there committed; and could also point out the man
by name that should do the execution, long before he was born (1
Kings 13:2). What shall I say, Enoch by it could tell what should
be done at the end of the world (Jude 14,15). How did the prophets,
to a circumstance, prophesy of Christ's birth, his death, his
burial, of their giving him gall and vinegar, of their parting his
raiment, and piercing his hands and feet! (Isa 53). Of his riding
on an ass also; all this they saw, when they spake of him (John
12:41). Peter also, though half asleep, could at the very first
word, call Moses and Elias by their names, when they appeared to
Christ in the holy mount (Luke 9:33). He is very ignorant of the
operation of the Spirit of God, that scrupleth these things. But
now, I say, if these things have been done, seen, and known, by
spiritual men, while their knowledge hath been but in part, how
shall we know, see, and discern, when that which is perfect is
come? Which will be at the resurrection; "It is raised a spiritual
body."

Thus, in few words, have I shewed you the truth of the resurrection
of the just, and also the manner of their rising. Had I judged it
convenient, I might have much enlarged on each particular, and have
added many more; for the doctrine of the resurrection, however
questioned by heretics, and erroneous persons; yet is such a truth,
that almost all the holy scriptures of God point at, and centre
in it.

God hath, from the beginning of the world, shewed to us, that our
body must be with him, as well as our soul, in the kingdom of
heaven. I say, he hath shewed us, how he will deal with those that
are alive at Christ's coming, by his translating of Enoch (Gen
5:24), and by taking him body and soul to himself (Heb 11:5); As
also, by his catching of Elias up body and soul into heaven, in
a fiery chariot (2 Kings 2:11), and,

Secondly He hath often put us in remembrance of the rising of those
that are dead, at that day, as, (1.) By the faith he gave Abraham,
concerning the offering of his son: for when he offered him, he
accounted "that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead;
from whence also he received him in a figure" (Heb 11:19). In a
figure of the resurrection of Christ, for Abraham's justification;
and of Abraham's resurrection by Christ at the last day, for his
glorification. (2.) By the faith he gave Joseph concerning his
bones; which charge, the godly in Egypt, did diligently observe,
and to that end, did keep them four hundred years; and at length,
carried them, I say, from Egypt to Canaan, which was a type of our
being carried in our body, from this world to heaven (Heb 11:22).

Besides, how oft did God give power to his prophets, servants, and
Christ Jesus, to raise some that were now dead, and some that had
been long so; and all, no doubt, to put the present generations,
as also the generations yet unborn, in mind of the resurrection of
the dead. To this end, I say, how was the Shunammite's son raised
from the dead? (2 Kings 4). The man also at the touching of the
bones of Elisha? (2 Kings 13:20,21). Together with the body of
Lazarus, with Jairus's daughter, and Tabitha, and many others,
who, after their souls were departed from them, Lazarus lying in
his grave four days, were all raised to life again, and lived with
that very body out of which the soul, at their death, had departed
(Luke 8:53-56; John 11:43,44; Acts 9:40,41). But above all, that
notable place in Matthew, at the resurrection of the Lord Jesus,
gives us a notable fore-word of the resurrection of the just.
Saith the text, "And the graves were opened; and many bodies of
the saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after
his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto
many" (Matt 27:52,53).

When the author to the Hebrews had given us a catalogue of the
worthies of the Old Testament, he saith at last, "These all died
in faith." In the faith of what? That they should lie and rot in
their grave eternally? No, verily; this is the faith of Ranters,
not of Christians. They all died in faith, that they should rise
again; and therefore counted this world not worth the living in,
upon unworthy terms, that after death "they might obtain a better
resurrection" (Heb 11:13,35).

It is also worth the considering, that of Paul to the Philippians,
where he saith that he was confident that that God that had begun
a good work in them would "perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ" (Phil 1:6). Which day of Christ, was not the day of their
conversion, for that was passed with them already, they were now
the children of God; but this day of Christ, it is the same which
in other places is called the day when he shall come with the
sound of the last trump to raise the dead. For you must know, that
the work of salvation is not at an end with them that are now in
heaven; no, nor ever will, until (as I shewed you before) their
bodies be raised again. God, as I have told you, hath made our
bodies the members of Christ, and God doth not count us thoroughly
saved, until our bodies be as well redeemed and ransomed out of
the grave and death, as our souls from the curse of the law, and
dominion of sin.

Though God's saints have felt the power of much of his grace, and
have had many a sweet word fulfilled on them; yet one word will be
unfulfilled on their particular person, so long as the grave can
shut her mouth upon them: but, as I said before, when the gates
of death do open before them, and the bars of the grave do fall
asunder; then shall be brought to pass that saying that is written,
"Death is swallowed up of victory;" and then will they hear that
most pleasant voice, "Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the
dead" (Isa 26:19). Thus much touching the truth of the resurrection
of the just, with the manner of their rising.

Now you must know, that the time of the rising of these just, will
be at the coming of the Lord: for when they arise, nay, just before
they are raised, the Lord Jesus Christ will appear in the clouds
in flaming fire, with all his mighty angels; the effect of which
appearing will be the rising of the dead, &c. "For the Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout," saith Paul, "and with the
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead
shall rise" (2 Thess 1:8; 1 Thess 4:16; 1 Cor 15:52).

Now at the time of the Lord's coming, there will be found in the
world alive both saints and sinners. As for the saints that then
shall be found alive, they shall, so soon as all the saints are
raised out of their graves, not die, but be changed, and swallowed up
of incorruption, immortality, and glory; and have the soul-spiritual
translation, as the raised saints shall have; as he saith, "We
shall not all [die, or] sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye,--for the trumpet shall sound,
and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed"
(1 Cor 15:51,52). And again, "For the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and
with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:
then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall
we ever be with the Lord" (1 Thess 4:16,17). As he saith also
in another place, he "shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing and his kingdom" (2 Tim 4:1).

Now when the saints that sleep shall be raised thus incorruptible,
powerful, glorious, and spiritual; and also those that then shall
be found alive, made like them: then forthwith, before the unjust
are raised, the saints shall appear before the judgment-seat of
the Lord Jesus Christ, there to give an account to their Lord the
Judge, of all things they have done; and to receive a reward for
their good according to their labour.

They shall rise, I say, before the wicked, they being themselves
the proper children of the resurrection; that is, Those that must
have all the glory of it, both as to pre-eminency and sweetness;
and therefore they are said, when they rise, to rise from the dead;
that is, in their rising, they leave the reprobate world behind
them (Luke 20:35,36; Acts 3:15; 4:10; 13:30; John 12:1,9,17).
And it must be so, because also the saints will have done their
account, and be set upon the throne with Christ, as kings and
princes with him, to judge the world, when the wicked world are
raised. The saints shall judge the world; they shall judge angels;
yea, they shall sit upon the thrones of judgment to do it (1
Cor 6:2,3; Psa 122:5). But to pass that, [we come THIRD, to the
examination the just must undergo, and the account they must give
to the Lord the Judge; or,]

THE JUDGMENT OF THE JUST.

Now when the saints are raised, as ye have heard, they must give
an account of all things, in general, that they have done while
they were in the world; of all things, I say, whether they be good
or bad.

FIRST, Of all their bad; but mark, not under the consideration of
vagabonds, slaves and sinners, but as sons, stewards, and servants
of the Lord Jesus. That this shall be, it is evident from divers
places of the holy Scriptures:

First, Paul saith, "We shall all stand before the judgment-seat
of Christ,"--we saints--"For it is written, As I live, saith the
Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess
to God. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to
God" (Rom 14:10-12). Again, "Wherefore we labour, that, whether
present or absent, we may be accepted of him. For we must all
appear before the judgment-seat of Christ; that every one [of us]
may receive the things done in his body, according to what he hath
done, whether it be good or bad" (2 Cor 5:9,10).

It is true, God loveth his people, but yet he loveth not their sins,
nor anything they do, though with the greatest zeal for him, if
he be contrary to his word; wherefore as truly as God will given
a reward to his saints and children for all that they have indeed
well done; so truly will he at this day distinguish their good
and bad: and when both are manifest by the righteous judgment of
Christ; he will burn up their bad, with all their labour, travel,
and pains in it for ever. He can tell how to save his people, and
yet take vengeance on their inventions (Psa 99:8).

That is an observable place, in the first epistle of Paul to the
Corinthians, and the third chapter, "If any man build," saith he,
"upon this foundation [Christ] gold, silver, precious stones,
wood, hay, stubble; every man's work shall be made manifest: for
the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire;
and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If any
man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive
a reward. If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss;
but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire" (1 Cor 3:12-15).
Now observe,

1. As I said before, the foundation is Christ (verse 11).

2. The gold, silver, and precious stones that here are said to be
built upon him, are all the actings in faith and love, according
to the word, that the saints are found doing for his sake in the
world (1 Peter 1:7; Rev 3:18).

3. To build on him wood, hay, and stubble, it is to build, together
with what is right in itself, human inventions and carnal ordinances,
fathering them still on God and his allowance.

4. The fire that here you read of, it is the pure word and law of
God (Jer 23:29; John 12:48).

5. The day that here you read of, it is the day of Christ's coming
to judgment, to reveal the hidden things of darkness, and to make
manifest the counsels of the heart (1 Cor 4:5).

6. At this day, the gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, and
stubble, and that of every man, shall be tried by this fire, that
it may be manifest of what sort it is; the wind, the rain, and
floods, beat now as vehemently against the house upon the rock,
as against that on the sand (Luke 6:48,49).

Observe again,

(1.) That the apostle speaks here of the saved, not of the
reprobate--"He himself shall be saved."

(2.) That this saved man may have wood, hay, and stubble; that is,
things that will not abide the trial.

(3.) That neither this man's goodness, nor yet God's love to him,
shall hinder all his wood, hay, or stubble from coming on the
stage, "Every man's work shall be manifest: the fire shall try
every man's work, of what sort it is."

(4.) Thus, a good man shall see all his wood, hay, and stubble
burnt up in the trial before his face.

(5.) That good man then shall suffer loss, or, the loss of all
things that are not then according to the word of God--"If any
man's works shall be burnt," or any of them, "he shall suffer
loss; but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire"--that is,
yet so as that all that ever he hath done, shall be tried, and
squared by the word of God.

From all which, it must be unavoidably concluded, that the whole
body of the elect must count with their Lord for all things they
have done, whether good or bad, and that he will destroy all
their bad, with the purity of his word, yea, and all their pains,
travel, and labour that they have spent about it. I am persuaded
that there are now many things done by the best of saints, that
then they will gladly disown and be ashamed of; yea, which they
have and do still do with great devotion. Alas, what gross things
do some of the saints in their devotion father upon God, and
do reckon him the author thereof, and that he also prompts them
forward to the doing thereof, and doth give them his presence in
the performance of them! Yea, and as they father many superstitions and
scriptureless things upon him; so they die in the same opinion,
and never come in this world, to the sight of their evil and
ignorance herein.6

But now the judgment-day is the principal time wherein everything
shall be set in its proper place; that which is of God in its
place, and that which is not, shall now be discovered, and made
manifest. In many things now we offend all; and then we shall see
the many offences we have committed, and shall ourselves judge
them as they are. The Christian, is in this world, so candid a
creature, that take him when he is not under some great temptation,
and he will ingeniously confess to his God, before all men, how
he hath sinned and transgressed against his Father; and will fall
down at the feet of God, and cry, Thou art righteous, for I have
sinned; and thou art gracious, that, notwithstanding my sin, thou
shouldest save me. Now, I say, if the Christian is so simple and
plain-hearted with God, in the days of his imperfection, when he
is accompanied with many infirmities and temptations; how freely
will he confess and acknowledge his miscarriages, when he comes
before his Lord and Saviour; absolutely stript of all temptation
and imperfection. "As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall
bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God" (Rom 14:11; Phil
2:10,11). Every knee shall bow, and reverence God the Creator, and
Christ the Redeemer of the world; and every tongue shall confess,
that his will alone ought by them to have been obeyed in all things;
and shall confess also, and that most naturally and freely--I mean,
the saints shall--in how many things they were deceived, mistaken,
deluded, and drawn aside in their intended devotion and honour to
God.

[Second.] But yet take notice, that in this day, when the saints
are thus counting for their evil before their Saviour and Judge;
they shall not then, as now, at the remembrance and confession
of sin, be filled with the guilt, confusion, and shame that now
through the weakness of faith attendeth their souls; neither shall
they in the least be grieved or offended, that God hath before the
angels and the rest of their holy brethren, laid open to a tittle
their infirmities, from the least and first, to the biggest and
last. For,

1. The God to whom they confess all, they will now more perfectly
than ever see he doth love them, and free them from all, even when
and before they confess and acknowledge them to him; and they
shall, I say, have their soul so full of the ravishing raptures
of the life and glory that now they are in, that they shall be
of it swallowed up in that measure and manner, that neither fear,
nor guilt, nor confusion can come near them, or touch them. Their
Judge is their Saviour, their Husband, and Head; who, though he
will bring every one of them for all things to judgment, yet he
will keep them for ever out of condemnation, and anything that
tendeth that way. "Perfect love casteth out fear," even while we
are here; much more then, when we are with our Saviour, our Jesus,
being passed from death to life (John 5:24; 1 John 4:18).

2. The saints at this day, shall have their hearts and souls so
wrapped up in the pleasure of God their Saviour, that it shall be
their delight, to see all things, though once never so near and
dear unto them; yet now to perish, if not according to his word
and will. "Thy will be done," is to be always our language here
(Matt 6:10); but to delight to see it done in all things, though
it tend never so much to the destruction of what we love; to
delight, I say, to see it done in the height and perfection of
delight; it will be when we come to heaven, or when the Lord shall
come to judge the world. But,

3. The sole end of the counting of the saints at the day of God,
it will be, not only for the vindication of the righteousness,
holiness, and purity of the word, neither will it centre only in
the manifestation of the knowledge and heart-discerning nature
of Christ [though both these will be in it, (Rev 2:22,23)]. But
their very remembrances and sight of the sin and vanity that they
have done while here; it shall both set off, and heighten the
tender affections of their God unto them; and also increase their
joy and sweetness of soul, and clinging of heart to their God.
Saints while here, are sweetly sensible that the sense of sin,
and the assurance of pardon, will make famous work in their poor
hearts. Ah, what meltings without guilt! what humility without
casting down! and what a sight of the creature's nothingness, yet
without fear, will this sense of sin work in the soul! The sweetest
frame, the most heart-endearing frame, that possibly a Christian
can get into while in this world, is to have a warm sight of sin,
and of a Saviour upon the heart at one time. Now it weeps not for
fear and through torment, but by virtue of constraining grace and
mercy, and is at this very time, so far off of disquietness of
heart, by reason of the sight of its wickedness, that it is driven
into an ecstasy, by reason of the love and mercy that is mingled
with the sense of sin in the soul.

The heart never sees so much of the power of mercy as now, nor of
the virtue, value, and excellency of Christ in all his offices as
now, and the tongue so sweetly enlarged to proclaim and cry up
grace as now; now will Christ "come to be glorified in his saints,
and to be admired in all them that believe" (2 Thess 1:10).

Wherefore, though the saints receive by faith the forgiveness
of sins in this life, and so are passed from death to life; yet
again, Christ Jesus, and God his Father, will have every one of
these sins reckoned up again, and brought fresh upon the stage in
the day of judgment, that they may see and be sensible for ever,
what grace and mercy hath laid hold upon them. And this I take
to be the reason of that remarkable saying of the apostle Peter,
"Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence
of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was
preached unto you: whom the heaven must receive until the times
of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth
of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:19-21).

If a sense of some sin, [for who sees all? (Psa 19:12)], and
a sight of the love of God, will here so work upon the spirit of
the godly: what will a sight of all sin do, when together with it
they are personally present with their Lord and Saviour?

Yea, if a sight of some sins, with a possibility of pardon,
will make the heart love, reverence, and fear with guiltless and
heart-affecting fears; what will a general sight of all sin, and
together with them an eternal acquittance from them, work on the
heart of the saint for ever?

Yea, I say again, if a sight of sin, and the love of God, will make
such work in that soul where yet there is unbelief, blindness,
mistrust, and forgetfulness: what will a sight of sin do in that
soul, who is swallowed up of love, who is sinless, and temptationless;
who hath all the faculties of soul and body strained by love and
grace, to the highest pin of perfection, that is possible to be in
glory enjoyed and possessed? Oh the wisdom and goodness of God,
that he at this day, should so cast about the worst of our things,
even those that naturally tend to sink us, and damn us, for our
great advantage! "All things shall work together for good," indeed,
"to them that love God" (Rom 8:28). Those sins that brought a curse
upon the whole world, that spilt the heart-blood of our dearest
Saviour, and that laid his tender soul under the flaming wrath of
God, shall by his wisdom and love, tend to the exaltation of his
grace, and the inflaming of our affections to him for ever and
ever (Rev 5:9-14).

It will not be thus with devils; it will not be thus with reprobates; the
saved only have this privilege peculiar to themselves. Wherefore,
to vary a little from the matter in hand: will God make that use
of sin, even in our counting for it, that shall in this manner work
for our advantage? Why then, let saints also make that advantage
of their sin, as to glorify God thereby, which is to be done, not
by saying, "Let us do evil, that good may come;" or, "Let us sin,
that grace may abound;" but by taking occasion by the sin that is
past to set the crown upon the head of Christ for our justification;
continually looking upon it, so as to press us, to cleave close
to the Lord Jesus, to grace and mercy through him, and to the
keeping of us humble for ever, under all his dispensations and
carriages to us.

Now, having counted for all their evil, and confessed to God's glory,
how they fell short, and did not the truth in this, or that, or
other particulars, and having received their eternal acquittance
from the Lord and Judge, in the sight of both angels and saints;
forthwith the Lord Jesus will make inquiry,

SECOND, into all the good and holy actions and deeds they did do
in the world. Now here shall all things be reckoned up, from the
very first good thing that was done by Adam or Abel, to the last
that will fall out to be done in the world. The good of all the
holy prophets, of all apostles, pastors, teachers, and helps in
the church; here also will be brought forth and to light, all the
good carriages of masters of families, of parents, of children,
of servants, of neighbours, or whatever good thing any man doth.
But to be general and short,

First, here will be a recompense for all that have sincerely laboured
in the word and doctrine--I say, a recompense for all the souls
they have saved by their word, and watered by the same. Now shall
Paul the planter, and Apollos the waterer, with every one of the
their companions, receive the reward that is according to their
works (1 Cor 3:6-8).

Now, all the preaching, praying, watching, and labour thou hast
been at, in thy endeavouring to catch men from Satan to God, shall
be rewarded with spangling glory. Not a soul thou hast converted
to the Lord Jesus, nor a soul thou hast comforted, strengthened,
or helped by thy wholesome counsel, admonition, and comfortable
speech, but it shall stick as a pearl in that crown "which the Lord
the righteous Judge, shall give thee at that day" (2 Tim 4:7,8).
That is, if thou dost it willingly, delighting to lift up the name
of God among men; if thou doest it with love, and longing after
the salvation of sinners, otherwise thou wilt have only thy labour
for thy pains, and no more. "If I do this thing willingly, I have
a reward: but if against my will, a dispensation of the gospel is
committed to my charge" (1 Cor 9:17; Phil 1:15). But, I say, if
thou do it graciously, then a reward followeth; "For what is our
hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye," saith Paul,
"in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are
our glory and joy" (1 Thess 2:19,20). Let him therefore that Christ
hath put into his harvest, take comfort in the midst of all his
sorrow, and know that God acknowledgeth, that he that converteth
a sinner from the error of his way, doth even save that soul from
death, "and covereth a multitude of sins" (James 5:20). Wherefore
labour to convert, labour to water, labour to build up, and to
"Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre,
but of a ready mind;--and when the chief Shepherd shall appear,
ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away" (1 Peter
5:2,4).

Secondly, And as the ministers of Christ's gospel shall at this day
be recompensed; so shall also those more private saints be with
tender affections, and love looked on, and rewarded for all their
work and labour of love, which they have shewed to the name of
Christ, in ministering to his saints, and suffering for his sake
(Heb 6:10). "Whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall
he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free" (Eph 6:8).
Ah! little do the people of God think, how largely and thoroughly,
God will at that day, own and recompense all the good and holy
acts of his people. Every bit, every drop, every rag, and every
night's harbour, though but in a wisp of straw, shall be rewarded
in that day before men and angels--"Whosoever shall give to drink
unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name
of a disciple, verily I say unto you," saith Christ, "he shall in
no wise lose his [a disciple's] reward" (Matt 10:42). Therefore
"When thou makest a feast," saith he, "call the poor, the maimed,
the lame, the blind: And thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot
recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection
of the just" (Luke 14:13,14). If there be any repentance among
the godly at this day, it will be, because the Lord Jesus, in his
person, members, and word, was no more owned, honoured, entertained,
and provided for by them, when they were in this world: For it
will be ravishing to all, to see what notice the Lord Jesus will
then take of every widow's mite. He, I say, will call to mind, even
all those acts of mercy and kindness, which thou hast shewed to
him, when thou wast among men. I say, he will remember, cry up,
and proclaim before angels and saints, those very acts of thine,
which thou hast either forgotten, or, through bashfulness wilt
not at that day count worth the owing. He will reckon them up so
fast, and so fully, that thou wilt cry, Lord, when did I do this?
and when did I do the other? "When saw we thee an hungered, and
fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a
stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when
saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the King
shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
ye have done it unto me" (Matt 25:37-40). "The good works of some
are manifest beforehand; and they that are otherwise cannot be
hid" (1 Tim 5:25). Whatever thou hast done to one of the least of
these my brethren, thou hast done it unto me. I felt the nourishment
of thy food, and the warmth of thy fleece. I remember thy loving
and holy visits when my poor members were sick, and in prison, and
the like. When they were strangers, and wanderers in the world, thou
tookest them in. "Well done, thou good and faithful servant;--enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord" (Matt 25:21-23; 34-47).

Thirdly, Here also will be a reward for all that hardness, and
Christian enduring of affliction that thou hast met with for thy
Lord, while thou wast in the world. Here now will Christ begin from
the greatest suffering, even to the least, and bestow a reward on
them all: from the blood of the suffering saint, to the loss of
a hair: nothing shall go unrewarded (Heb 11:36-40; 2 Cor 8:8-14).
"For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory" (2 Cor 4:17).
Behold by the scriptures how God hath recorded the sufferings of
his people, and also how he hath promised to reward them--"Blessed
are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile
you," and speak "all manner of evil against you falsely, for my
sake. Rejoice," leap for joy, "and be exceeding glad: for great is
your reward in heaven" (Matt 5:11,12; Luke 6:22,23). "And every
one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake,
shall receive an hundred-fold, and shall inherit everlasting life"
(Matt 19:29).

Fourthly, There is also a reward at this day, for all the more
secret, and more retired works of Christianity. 1. There is not
now one act of faith in thy soul, either upon Christ, or against
the Devil, and Antichrist; but it shall in this day be found out,
and praised, honoured and glorified, in the face of heaven (1
Peter 1:7). 2. There is not one groan to God in secret, against
thy own lusts, and for more grace, light, spirit, sanctification,
and strength to go through this world like a Christian: but it
shall even at the coming of Christ be rewarded openly (Matt 6:6).
3. There hath not one tear dropped from thy tender eye against thy
lusts, the love of this world, or for more communion with Jesus
Christ, but as it is now in the bottle of God; so then it shall
bring forth such plenty of reward, that it shall return upon thee
with abundance of increase. "Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye
shall laugh" (Luke 6:21). "Thou tellest my wanderings: put thou
my tears into thy bottle; are they not in thy book?" (Psa 56:8).
"They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that goeth forth and
weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him" (Psa 126:5,6).

Having thus in brief shewed you something concerning the resurrection
of the saints, and that they shall count with their Lord at his
coming, both for the burning up what was not according to the
truth, and rewarding them for all their good. It remains, that I
now in few words,

FOURTH, Shew you something also of that with which they shall be
rewarded.

THE REWARD OF THE JUST.

First then, those that shall be found in the day of their resurrection,
when they shall have all their good things brought upon the stage;
they I say, that then shall be found the people most laborious for
God while here; they shall at that day enjoy the greatest portion of
God, or shall be possessed with most of the glory of the Godhead
then. For that is the portion of saints in general (Rom 8:17;
Lam 3:24). And why shall he that doth most for God in this world,
enjoy most of him in that which is to come? But because by doing
and acting, the heart, and every faculty of the soul is enlarged,
and more capacitated, whereby more room is made for glory. Every
vessel of glory shall at that day be full of it; but every one will
not be capable to contain a like measure; and so if they should
have it communicated to them, would not be able to stand under it;
for there is "an eternal weight in the glory that saints shall
then enjoy" (2 Cor 4:17), and every vessel must be at that day
filled--that is, have its heavenly load of it.

All Christians have not the same enjoyment of God in this life,
neither indeed were they able to bear it if they had it (1 Cor
3:2). But those Christians that are most laborious for God in this
world, they have already most of him in their souls, and that not
only because diligence in God's ways, is the means whereby God
communicates himself; but also because thereby the senses are
made more strong, and able, by reason of use, to understand God,
and to discern both good and evil (Heb 5:13,14). To him that hath,
to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance (Matt
13:11,12). He that laid out his pound for his master, and gained
ten therewith, he was made ruler over ten cities; but he that by
his pound gained but five, he was made ruler over but five (Luke
19:16-19). Often, he that is best bred in his youth, he is best
able to manage most, when he is a man, touching things of this
life (Dan 1:3,4); but always he that is best bred, and that is most
in the bosom of God, and that so acts for him here; he is the man
that will be best able to enjoy most of God in the kingdom of
heaven. It is observable that Paul saith, "Our--affliction--worketh
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory" (2 Cor
4:17). Our afflictions do it, not only because there is laid up a
reward for the afflicted, according to the measure of affliction;
but because afflictions, and so every service of God, doth make
the heart more deep, more experimental, more knowing and profound;
and so more able to hold, contain, and bear more (Psa 119:71).
"Every man shall receive his own reward, according to his own
labour" (1 Cor 3:8). And this is the reason of such sayings as
these--Lay up for yourselves a good foundation against the time
to come, that you may lay hold on eternal life (1 Tim 6:19), which
eternal life, is not the matter of our justification from sin in
the sight of God; for that is done freely by grace, through faith
in Christ's blood; (but here the apostle speaks of giving of alms)
but it is the same that in the other place he calls "the far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory." And hence it is that he
in his stirring them up to be diligent in good works, doth tell
them, that he doth not exhort them to it because he wanted, but
because he would have "fruit that might abound to their account"
(Phil 4:17); as he saith also in another place, "Beloved brethren,
be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the
Lord" (1 Cor 15:58). Therefore I say, the reward that the saints
shall have at this day for all the good they have done, it is the
enjoyment of God, according to their works: though they shall be
freely justified and glorified without works.

Second, As the enjoyment of God at that day, will be to the saints,
according to their works and doings--I speak not now of justification
from sin--so will their praise and commendations at that day, be
according to the same, and both of them their degrees of glory; for
I say, as God by communicating of himself unto us at that day,
will thereby glorify us, so also he will for the adding all things
that may furnish with glory every way, cause to be proclaimed in
the face of heaven, and in the presence of all the holy angels;
everything that hath for God, his ways, and people, been done by
us while here we have been. "Whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness
shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in
the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops" (Luke
12:2,3). Again, He that "shall confess me," saith Christ, "before
men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven"
(Matt 10:32).

Now as he of whom Christ is ashamed when he comes in his glory, and
in the glory of the holy angels, will then lie under inconceivable
disgrace, shame, dishonour, and contempt: so he whom Christ shall
confess, own, commend, and praise at that day, must needs have very
great dignity, honour, and renown, "for then shall every man have
praise of God"--to wit, according to his works (1 Cor 4:5). Now
will Christ proclaim before thee and all others what thou hast
done, and what thou hast suffered, what thou hast owned, and what
thou hast withstood for his name (Mark 8:38). This is he that forsook
his goods, his relations, his country, and life for me: this is
the man that overcame the flatteries and threats, allurements and
enticings, of a whole world for me; behold him, he is an Israelite
indeed (John 1:47), the top man in his generation, "none like him
in all the earth" (Job 1:8). It is said, that when king Ahasuerus
had understanding of how good service Mordecai the Jew had done
to and for him, he commanded that the royal apparel and the crown,
with the horse that the king did ride on, should be given to him,
and that he should with that crown, apparel, and horse, be had
through the city, in the presence of all his nobles, and that
proclamation should be made before him, "Thus shall it be done
unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour" (Esth 6:9-11).

Ahasuerus in this was a type to hold forth to the children of God,
how kindly he will take all their labour and service of love, and
how he will honour and dignify the same; as Christ saith, "Let your
loins be girded about, and your lights burning; And ye yourselves
like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will return from
the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto
him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he
cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall
gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and will come forth
and serve them" (Luke 12:35-57). The meaning is, that those souls
that shall make it their business to honour the Lord Jesus Christ,
in the day of their temptation; he will make it his business
to honour and glorify them in the day of his glorification (John
12:26). "Verily, I say unto you, that he will make them sit down
to meat, and shall come forth and serve them. If any man will
serve me," saith he, "him will my Father honour." It hath been
God's way in this world to proclaim the acts and doings of his
saints in his word before all in this world, and he will do it in
that which is to come (Mark 14:9; Rev 3:4; 14:1-6).

Third, Another thing that shall be yet added to the glory of the
saints, in the kingdom of their Saviour, at his coming is, they
shall every one of them then have his throne and place of degree
on Christ's right hand, and on his left, in his glorious kingdom,
according to the relation they stand in to Christ, as the members
of his body; for as Christ will have a special eye on us, and
a tender and affectionate heart, to recompense to the full every
good thing that any man doth for his name in this world: so also
he will have as great regard, that there be to every member of his
body, the place, and state that is comely for every such member.
When the mother of Zebedee's children petitioned our Saviour that
he would grant to her, that her two sons might sit, the one on his
right hand, and the other on his left, in his kingdom: though he
did not grant to her the request for her children, yet he affirmed
that there would be places of degrees and honour in heaven,
saying, "To sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to
give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my
Father" (Matt 20:20-23). In the temple, there were chambers bigger
and lesser, higher and lower, more inward and more outward: which
chambers were types of the mansions that our Lord when he went
away, told us he went to prepare for us. "In my Father's house
are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go
to prepare a place for you" (John 14:2,3). The foot here, shall
not have the place prepared for the eye, nor yet the hand, that
which is prepared for the ear, but every one shall have his own
place in the body of Christ, and the glory also prepared for such
a relation. Order, as it is comely in earth, so much more in the
kingdom of the God of order, in heaven; where all things shall be
done in their utmost perfections. Here shall Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
Moses, Joshua, David, with the prophets, have every one his place,
according to the degree of Old Testament saints. As God said to
Daniel, "Go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt rest,
and stand in thy lot at the end of the days" (Dan 12:13). And here
also shall Peter, Paul, Timothy, and all other the church officers
have their place, and heavenly state, according as God hath
set them in the church in the New Testament. As Paul saith of the
deacons, "They that have used the office of a deacon well, purchase
to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which
is in Christ Jesus" (1 Tim 3:13). And so of all other saints, be
they here of what rank, quality, or place in the church soever,
they shall have every one his state, his heavenly state, according
as he standeth in the body. As he saith, seeing those members
that are most feeble are necessary, to them shall be given "more
abundant honour" (1 Cor 12:22,23). Of this heavenly order in the
kingdom of Christ, when his saints are risen from the dead, was
Solomon a notable type in his family, and among his servants and
officers, who kept such exactness in the famous order in which he
had placed all about him, that it did amaze and confound beholders.
For "when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and
the house that he had built, and the meat of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and
their apparel; his cup-bearers also, and their apparel; and his
ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord, there was no
more spirit in her" (2 Chron 9:3,4). "Glorious things are spoken
of thee, O city of God" (Psa 87:3). Having gone thus far, I shall
now come to

THE SECOND PART OF THE TEXT,

To wit, that there shall be a resurrection of the wicked. "There
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust;"
for as the just go before the unjust, in name and dignity,
and honour, so they shall in the last day, go before them in the
resurrection.

Now, then, when the saints have thus risen out of their graves,
given up their accounts, received their glory, and are set upon
the thrones, "for there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones
of the house of David" (Psa 122:5). When, I say, they are all
of them in their royal apparel, with crowns of glory, every one
presenting the person of a king, then come the unjust out of their
graves, to receive their judgment for what they have done in the
body. As Paul saith, "We must all appear before the judgment-seat
of Christ, that every one," both saints and sinners, "may receive
the things done in the body, whether it be good, or whether it be
bad."

But now, because I would prove by the word, whatever I would have
others receive for a truth, therefore I shall in few particulars,

FIRST, prove the resurrection of the wicked.

THE RESURRECTION OF THE WICKED.

First, then, it is evident, that the wicked shall rise, from the
very terms and names that the raised shall then go under, which
are the very same names that they did go under when they lived in
this world. They are called the heathen, the nations, the world,
the wicked, and those that do iniquity; they are called men,
women, [of] Sodom, Sidon, Bethsaida, Capernaum, and Tyre. The men
of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment (Luke 10:12-14); the queen
of the south shall rise up in the judgment (Matt 12:41,42); and
it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of judgment than
for other sinners that have resisted more light (Matt 11:21-24).
"The heavens and the earth, which are now,--are kept in store,
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition
of ungodly men" (2 Peter 3:7; Joel 3:12-14). Now these terms, or
names, are not given to the spirits of the wicked only, but to
them as consisting of body and soul. Further, Christ tells his
adversaries, when they had apprehended him, and shamefully entreated
him, that yet they should see him sit on the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds of heaven (Matt 25:31,32; 26:64; Jude
14,15), as John also doth testify, saying, "Behold, he cometh with
clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him" (Rev
1:7). Now none of these sayings are yet fulfilled, neither shall
they, until his second coming; for though the Jews did many of
them see him, when he did hang upon the cross, yet then he was not
coming in the clouds of heaven, neither did then all kindreds of
the earth wail because of him. No, this is reserved till he comes
to judge the world; for then shall the ungodly be so put to it, that
gladly they would creep into the most invincible rock or mountain
under heaven, to hide themselves from his face, and the majesty of
his heavenly presence (Rev 6:14-17). There shall therefore, that
this may be brought to pass, be a resurrection of the dead, both
of the just and unjust. For though an opinion of no resurrection
may now lull men asleep, in security and impiety, yet the Lord
when he comes will rouse them, and cause them to awake; not only
out of their security, but out of their graves, to their doom,
that they may receive for their error, the recompense that is meet.

Second, The body of the ungodly must, at the last, arise out of
the grave, because that body and their soul, while they lived in
the world, were co-partners in their lusts and wickedness. "The
Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed" (1
Sam 2:3). He will therefore bring every work into judgment, "with
every secret thing" (Eccl 12:14). And as he will bring into judgment
every work, so will he also the worker thereof, "even the dead,
small and great" (Rev 20:12-14). It is not in God to lay the
punishment where the fault is not, neither to punish a part of
the damned for the whole. "With righteousness shall he judge the
world, and the people with equity" (Psa 98:9). "Shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right?" (Gen 18:25). As therefore the
body was co-partner with the soul in sinning, so shall every man
receive the things done in his body, according to what he hath
done. Wherefore he saith in another place, "Behold, I come quickly;
and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be" (Rev 22:12). There shall therefore be a resurrection of
the dead, both of the just and unjust.

Third, The body of the wicked must rise again, because as the whole
man of the just also that is the vessel of mercy and glory; so the
whole man of the unjust is the vessel of wrath and destruction.
There are, saith Paul, in a great house not only vessels of gold
and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some to honour
and some to dishonour. Now, as he sheweth us, these vessels to
honour, they are good men, and the vessels to dishonour are the bad
(2 Tim 2:20,21). Now as these vessels to dishonour, are called the
vessels of wrath: so it is said, that God with much long-suffering,
doth suffer them to be fitted to destruction (Rom 9:22). How they
are thus fitted he also further sheweth, where he saith, They do
"after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasure up unto thyself
wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God" (Rom 2:5), which treasures of wickedness, James
saith, it is treasure up against the last days (which is the time
of judgment), and observe it, he saith, that then it shall eat
their flesh as it were fire (James 5:2,3). Now then, their bodies
being the vessels of the wrath of God, and again, seeing with this
wrath they must be possessed at the last day, that their flesh must
with it be eaten, it is evident, that their body must rise again
out of their graves, and before the judgment-seat appear; for it
is from thence, that each of them must go with his full load to
their long and eternal home, "where their worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched" (Mark 9:47,48).

Fourth, The severity of the hand of God towards his children, with
his forbearance of his enemies, doth clearly bespeak a resurrection
of the ungodly, that they may receive the reward for their wickedness
which they have committed in this world. We know, that while the
eyes of the wicked start out with fatness, the godly are plagued
all the day long, and chastened every morning (Psa 73:3-15),
wherefore it is evident, that the place and time of the punishment
of the ungodly, it is another world. If "judgment must begin at
the house of God,--what shall the end be of them that obey not
the gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?" (1 Peter 4:17,18). Alas,
poor creatures! they now plot against the righteous, and gnash
upon them with their teeth; but "the Lord shall laugh at him, for
he seeth that his day is coming" (Psa 37:13); for as he saith, the
wicked is reserved, or let alone in his wickedness, to the day of
destruction, and shall then be brought forth to the day of wrath,
though in the meantime, he may go to his grave in his banner, and
rest within is tomb7 (Job 21:29-32). As Peter saith again, "The
Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished" (2
Peter 2:9): And Jude saith, For them "is reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever" (Jude 13). The punishment of the ungodly,
it is reserved till the day of judgment, which will be the time
of their resurrection. Observe,

1. The wicked must be punished.

2. The time of their punishment is not now, but at the day of
judgment.

3. This day of judgment, must be the same with the resurrection of
the dead, at the end of this world. "As therefore the tares are
gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of
this world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they
shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them
which do iniquity; And shall cast them into a furnace of fire:
there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth" (Matt 13:40,41).
There shall then be resurrection of the dead, both of the just
and unjust.

4. The sovereignty of the Lord Jesus over all creatures, doth plainly
foreshew a resurrection of the bad, as well as of the good. Indeed,
the unjust shall not arise, by virtue of any relation they stand
in to the Lord Jesus, as the saints shall; but yet, because all
are delivered into his hand, and he made sovereign Lord over them;
therefore by an act of his sovereign power, they that are ungodly,
shall arise; this is Christ's own argument, "The Father judgeth
no man," saith he, "but hath committed all judgment unto the
Son"--that is, count him, and fall before him as their sovereign
Lord, even as they honour the Father, and he hath given him authority
to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. And then
he adds, "Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come
forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life;
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation"
(John 5:22-29). From hence also Paul argueth, saying, "For to this
end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord
both of the dead and living," and then adds, "We shall all stand
before the judgment-seat of Christ" (Rom 14:9,10).

Pray mind these words, Jesus Christ by his death and resurrection,
did not only purchase grace, and remission of sins, for his elect,
with their eternal glory; but did thereby also obtain of the Father
to be Lord, and head over all things, whether they be things in
heaven, or things on earth, or things under the earth. "All power,"
saith he, "is given unto me, in heaven and in earth, and I have
the keys of hell and of death" (Matt 28:18; Rev 1:18), So that
all things, I say, whether they be visible, or invisible, whether
they be thrones or dominions, or principalities or powers; all
things were created by him, and for him (Col 1:16). This being
thus, "at the name of Jesus every knee should bow,--and that every
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of
God the Father" (Phil 2:10,11). Now, that this may be done, He
hath his resolutions upon a judgment-day, in which he, to shew
himself his people, his way, and word in their glory, will have
all his enemies raised out of their graves, and brought before
him, where he will sit upon them in the throne of his glory, and
will shew them then, "who is the blessed and only potentate, the
King of kings, and Lord of lords" (Matt 25:31,32; 1 Tim 6:14,15).

Behold, He comes, "with ten thousand of his saints, to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them
of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of
all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against
him" (Jude 14,15).

Fifth, The great preparation that God hath made for the judgment
of the wicked, doth clearly demonstrate their rising forth out
of their graves. 1. He hath appointed the day of their rising. 2.
He hath appointed their judge, to judge them. 3. He hath recorded
all their acts and doings against that day. 4. He hath also
already appointed the witnesses to come in against them. 5. The
instruments of death and misery, are already prepared for them.

1. He hath appointed the day of their rising, which day John calleth
the time of the dead, that they should be judged (Rev 11:18),
which time, Paul saith, is a time fixed; "He hath appointed a day
in which he will judge the world," &c. (Acts 17:31). This time and
day Christ brings down to an hour, saying, "The hour is coming,
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth;" &c. (John 5:28,29).

2. As he hath appointed the day, so he hath appointed the judge,
"He hath appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath
given assurance to all men, in that he hath raised him from the
dead" (Acts 17:31). This man is Jesus Christ; for it is he that
is "ordained of God to be the judge of quick an dead" (Acts 10:42).

3. All their deeds and works, to a word and thought, are every one
already recorded and enrolled in the books of the laws of heaven
against that day. "The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron,
and with the point of a diamond:--upon the table of their heart"
(Jer 17:1). And again saith God, "Write it--in a table, and note
it in a book, that it may be for the time to come, even for ever
and ever, that this is a rebellious people," &c. (Isa 30:8,9).

4. God hath prepared his witnesses against this day (James 5:1-3;
Job 20:27; Matt 24:14; Rom 2:14,15; Mal 3:5).

5. The instruments of death, and eternal misery, are already
prepared. "He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death; he
ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors" (Psa 7:13; 21:12).
Hell is of old prepared, he hath made it deep and large, the fire,
the everlasting fire, is also now of a long time prepared (Isa
30:33; Matt 25:41); the heavy weights of God's curse are also ready
(Deu 29:20) and their "damnation now of a long time slumbereth
not" (2 Peter 2:3). But now I say, how ridiculous a business would
all this be, if these things should be all prepared of the only
wise God, and there should be none to be judged; or if he that is
ordained judge, should not, either through want of power or will,
command these rebels, and force them before his judgment-seat.
Glad indeed, would the sinners be, if these things might be true;
glad I say, at very heart, if they might be in their secret places
of darkness, and the grave for ever; but it must not be; the day
of their rising is set; the judge is appointed; their deeds are
written; the deep dungeon is with open mouth ever waiting for
them; wherefore at the day appointed, neither earth, nor death,
nor hell can hinder: There shall be a resurrection of the dead,
both of the just and unjust.

Sixth and Lastly, Besides what hath been said, I cannot but
believe, there shall be a resurrection of the wicked at the last
day, because of the ungodly consequences, and errors that do most
naturally follow the denial thereof. For,

1. He that taketh away the doctrine of the resurrection of the
wicked; he taketh away one of the main arguments that God hath
provided for to convince a sinner of the evil of his ways; for
how shall a sinner be convinced of the evil of sin, if he be not
convinced of the certainty of eternal judgment? and how shall
he be convinced of eternal judgment, if you persuade him, that
when he is dead, he shall not at all rise? especially seeing the
resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment must unavoidably be
one the forerunner of the other (Heb 6:2). It was Paul's reasoning
of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come that made Felix
tremble (Acts 24:25). It is this also he calleth the argument
of terror, wherewith he persuaded men (2 Cor 5:10,11). This was
Solomon's argument (Eccl 11:9); and Christ's also, where he saith,
"that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of judgment" (Matt 12:36).

2. They that deny the resurrection of the wicked, they do both allow
and maintain the chief doctrine of the ranters, with most of the
debauched persons in the world. For the ranters deny it both in
principle and practice, and the other in practice at least. Now
to me it is very strange, that these men above all other, should
both know and live8 in the doctrines of the kingdom of God: especially
seeing the denial hereof is an evident token of one appointed to
wrath and destruction (2 Tim 2:18). But to be plain; there shall
be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust:
wherefore, whatever others may say or profess, being beguiled by
Satan, and their own hearts, yet do thou fear him that can "destroy
both soul and body in hell" (Matt 10:28).

There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and
unjust. "And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death
and hell delivered up the dead which were in them" (Rev 20:13).

Having in the first place shewed you, that the wicked must arise;
I shall in the next place,

SECOND, Shew you the manner of their rising. And observe it, as
the very title of the just and unjust, are opposites, so they are
in all other matters, and in their resurrections.

MANNER OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE WICKED.

First then, as the just in their resurrection do come forth in
incorruption: the unjust in their resurrection, shall come forth in
their corruptions; for though the ungodly at their resurrection,
shall for ever after, be incapable of having body and soul separate;
or of their being annihilated into nothing, yet it shall be far from
them to rise in incorruption; for if they arise in incorruption,
they must arise to life, and also must have the conquest over sin
and death (1 Cor 15:45), but that they shall not; for it is the
righteous only, that put on incorruption, that are swallowed up
of life. The wicked's resurrection, it is called the resurrection
of damnation (John 5:28). These in their very resurrection, shall
be hurt of the second death. They shall arise in death, and shall
be under it, under the gnawings, and terrors of it, all the time
of their arraignment. As it were, a living death shall feed upon
them; they shall never be spiritually alive, nor yet absolutely
dead; but much after that manner, that natural death, and hell, by
reason of guilt, doth feed on him, that is going before the judge,
to receive his condemnation to the gallows. You know, though a
felon go forth of the jail, when he is going to the bar for his
arraignment, yet he is not out of prison, or out of his irons for
that; his fetters are still making a noise on his heels,9 and the
thoughts of what he is to hear by and by from the judge, is still
frighting and afflicting his heart; death, like some evil spirit
or ghost, doth continually haunt him, and playeth the butcher
continually in his soul and conscience, with frights and fears
about the thoughts of the sudden, and insupportable after-clap,
by and by he is to meet withal.

Thus I say, will the wicked come out of their graves, having yet
the chains of eternal death hanging on them, and the talons of
that dreadful ghost fastened in their souls; so that life will be
far from them, even as far as heaven is from hell. This morning
to them, is even as the shadow of death. They will then be in the
very terrors of the shadow of death (Job 24:17). As Christ saith,
"Their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched" (Mark 9:44).
From death to eternity, it never shall be quenched, their bed is
now among the flames; and when they rise, they will rise in flames;
while they stand before the judge, it will be in flames, even in
the flames of a guilty conscience; they will in their coming before
the judge, be within the very jaws of death and destruction. Thus
I say, the ungodly shall be far off from rising as the saints; for
they will be even in the region and shadow of death. The first
moment of their rising, death will be ever over them, ever feeding
on their souls; and ever presenting to their hearts, the heights
and depths, of the misery that now must seize them, and, like
a bottomless gulf, must swallow them up. "They shall move out of
their holes like worms of the earth: They shall be afraid of the
Lord our God" (Micah 7:17).

Second, As the resurrection of the godly shall be a resurrection in
glory: so the resurrection of the wicked, it will be a resurrection
in dishonour. Yea, as the glory of saints, at the day of their
rising, will be glory unspeakable; so the dishonour of the ungodly
at that day, it will be dishonour beyond expression. As Daniel
saith, the good shall rise to everlasting life, but the wicked
to shame and everlasting contempt (Dan 12:2). And again, "O Lord,
when thou awakest," that is, to judge them, "thou shalt despise
their image" (Psa 73:20). Never was toad or serpent more loathsome
to any, than these will be in the eyes of God, in their rising
forth of their graves. When they go to their graves, saith Job,
"His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down
with him in the dust" (Job 20:11). And arise they shall, in the same
noisome and stinking condition; for as death leaves, so judgment
finds them. At the resurrection then of these ungodly, they will
be in a very loathsome condition.

The ungodly at their death are like the thistle seed, but at
their rising, they will be like the thistle grown; more noisome,
offensive, and provoking to rejection abundance.10

Then such dishonour, shame, and contempt will appear in them, that
neither God nor Christ, saints nor angels, will so much as once
regard them, or vouchsafe once to come near them. "He beholdeth
the wicked afar off;" because in the day of grace, they would
not come to hand, and be saved, therefore now they shall, all as
thorns, be thrust away, as with fences of iron (2 Sam 23:6,7),
Their rising, is called the resurrection of the unjust, and so
they at that day will appear, and will more stink in the nostrils
of God, and all the heavenly hosts, than if they had the most
irksome plague-sores in the world running on them. If a man at his
birth, be counted as one cast forth to the loathing of his person;
how loathsome, and irksome, dishonourable, and contemptible, will
those be that shall arise Godless, Christless, Spiritless, and
graceless, when the trumpet sounds to their judgment, they coming
out of their graves, far more loathsome, and filthy, than if they
should ascend out of the most filthy hole on earth.

Third, As the just shall arise in power, so the wicked and unjust,
in weakness and astonishment. Sin and guilt bringeth weakness, and
faintness in this life; how much more, when both with all their
power and force, like a giant, fasten on them; as God saith, "Can
thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that
I shall deal with thee?" (Eze 22:14). Now will the ghastly jaws
of despair gape upon thee, and now will condemnings of conscience,
like thunder-claps, continually batter against thy weary spirit.
It is the godly that have boldness in the day of judgment (1
John 4:17); but the wicked will be like the chaff which the wind
driveth away (Psa 1:4). Oh the fear, and the heart-aching that
will seize them in their rising! the frightful thoughts that then
will fill their throbbing hearts! Now must that soul that hath
been in hell-fire among the devils possess the body again. Possess
it, I say, with the hot scalding stink of hell upon it. They shall
not be able to lift up the head for ever; pangs shall take hold
on them, all their hands shall faint, and every man's heart shall
melt; "They shall be amazed one at another, their faces shall be
as flames" (Isa 13:6-8). Everything they see, hear, or think of,
shall tend to their discomfort. They must needs be weak, whom God
hath left, whom guilt hath seized, and whom death is swallowing
up for ever.

Fourth, As the just shall arise spiritual bodies, so the unjust shall
arise only as mere and naked lumps of sinful nature; not having
the least help from God, to bear them up under this condition.
Wherefore, so soon as ever they are risen out of their graves;
they will feel a continual sinking under every remembrance of every
sin, and thoughts of judgment; in their rising they fall--fall,
I say, from thenceforth, and for ever. And for this reason the
dungeon into which they fall is called "bottomless" (Rev 20:1).
Because, as there will be no end of their misery, so there will
be no stay or prop to bear them up in it. Only, as I said before,
they shall not now, as afore, be separate body from soul; but
both together, be bound in the cords of sin and iniquity, in which
they shall now tremble as thieves and murderers, &c., as they go
before the Judge, to hear what he will say unto them.

[THIRD--The examination and judgment of the wicked.]--Now, when the
wicked are thus raised out of their graves, they shall, together
with all the angels of darkness, their fellow-prisoners, be brought
up, being shackled in their sins, to the place of judgment; where
there shall sit upon them Jesus Christ, the King of kings and Lord
of lords, the Lord Chief Judge of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth. On whose right hand, and left,
shall sit all the princes, and heavenly nobles; the saints and
prophets, the apostles and witnesses of Jesus; every one in his
kingly attire, upon the throne of his glory (Joel 3:11-14). Then
shall be fulfilled that which is written, "But those mine enemies,
which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and
slay them" (Luke 19:27).

[THE JUDGMENT OF THE WICKED.]

When every one is thus set in his proper place, the Judge on his
throne, with his attendants, and the prisoners coming up to judgment,
forthwith there shall issue forth a mighty fire and tempest from
before the throne, which shall compass it round about; which
fire, shall be as bars and bounds to the wicked, to keep them at
a certain distance from the heavenly Majesty. As David saith, "Our
God shall come, and shall not keep silence; a fire shall devour
before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him"
(Psa 50:3). And again, "His throne was like the fiery flame, and
his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth
from before him;" &c. (Dan 7:9,10).

This preparation being made, to wit, the Judge with his attendants,
on the throne; the bar for the prisoners, and the rebels all
standing with ghastly jaws, to look of what comes after: presently
the books are brought forth, to wit, the books both of death and
life; and every one of them opened before the sinners, now to be
judged and condemned. For after that he had said before, "A fiery
stream issued and came forth from before him": he adds, "Thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him: the judgment was set, and the book was opened"
(Dan 7:10). And again, "I saw a great white throne, and him that
sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away;
and there was found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small
and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and
another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works" (Rev 20:11,12).

He doth not say, the book was opened, as of one, but the books, as
of many. And indeed, they are more than one, two, or three, out
of which the dead shall in the judgment be proceeded against.

First then, there is the book of the creatures to be opened. Second,
The book of God's remembrance. Third, The book of the law. And
fourth, the book of life. For by every one of these, that is, out
of what is written in them, shall the world of the ungodly be
judged.

"And the books were opened."

First, The book of the creatures shall be opened, and that first,
it concerns man's nature; and next, as it relates to all other
creatures.

I. He will shew in what the principles of nature were, as they
were God's creation; and how contrary to these principles, the
world have walked, acted, and done. The principles of nature are
concluded under three general heads.

1. That man by his own natural reason and judgment may gather, that
there is a God, a Deity, a chief, or first, or principal Being,
who is over all, and supreme above all. This instinct, I say, man
merely as he is a rational creature findeth in himself; and hence
it is, that all heathens that mind their own natural reason, do
conclude, that we are his offspring; that is, His creation and
workmanship. That He made heaven and earth, and hath made of one
blood, all nations of men; that "in him we live, and move, and
have our being;" &c. (Acts 17:24-29).

It appears further, that man by his own nature, doth know that
there is such a God.

(1.) By his being able to judge by nature, that there is such
a thing as sin; as Christ saith, "Why even of yourselves judge
ye not what is right?" (Luke 12:57). As if he had said, You are
degenerated even from the principles of nature, and right reason;
as Paul saith in another place, "Doth not even nature itself teach
you?" (1 Cor 11:14). Now he that can judge, that there is such a
thing as sin, it must of necessity be, that he understandeth that
there is a God, to whom sin is opposite; for if there be no God,
there is no sin against him; and he that knows not the one, knows
not the other.

(2.) It is evident further, that man by nature knows that there is
a God, by those fits of fear, and dread that are often begotten
in themselves, even in every man that breatheth in this world;
for they are by their own consciences, and thoughts, convicted
and reproved, judged and condemned, though they know neither Moses
nor Christ--For the Gentiles which have not the law, these are a
law to themselves, and shew the work of the law written in their
hearts (Rom 2:14,15)--that is, by this very thing, they hold forth
to all men, that God created them in that state and quality, that
they might in and by their own nature, judge and know that there is
a God. And it further sheweth itself, saith he, by those workings
of heart, convictions of conscience, and accusations, that
every thought maketh within them, together with the fear that is
begotten in them, when they transgress, or do those things that
are irrational, or contrary to what they see they shall do. I
might add further, that the natural proneness that is in all men
to devotion and religion, that is, of one kind or another, doth
clearly tell us, that they by the book of nature, which book is
themselves, do read that there is one great and eternal God.

2. The second principle of nature is, that this God should by man
be sought after, that they might enjoy communion with him for
ever. As I said before, the light of nature sheweth man, that there
is a great God, even God that made the world; and the end of its
shewing him this is, that "they should seek the Lord, if haply
they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from
every one of us" (Acts 17:27).

3. This light of nature teacheth, that men between themselves,
should do that which is just and equal. As Moses said, and that
long before the law was given, "Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye
wrong one another?" (Acts 7:26; Exo 2:13). as who should say, You
are of equal creation, you are the same flesh; you both judge,
that it is not equally done of any, to do you wrong, and therefore
ought to judge by the same reason, that ye ought not to wrong one
another.

Now against every one of these three principles, hath every man in
the whole world transgressed; as Paul saith, "For both Jews and
Gentiles--are all under sin" (Rom 3:9). For as touching the first,
(1.) who is he that hath honoured, reverenced, worshipped, and
adored the living God, to the height, both of what they saw in
him, and also according to the goodness and mercy they have as
men received from him? All have served and worshipped the creature
more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever (Rom 1:25), and
so have walked contrary to, and have sinned against, this bond of
nature, in this first principle of it.

(2.) Men, instead of minding their own future happiness, as nature
teacheth, they have, through their giving way to sin and Satan,
minded nothing less; for though reason teacheth all men to love
that which is good and profitable, yet they, contrary to this,
have loved that which is hurtful and destructive. Yea, though sense
teacheth to avoid the danger that is manifest; yet man, contrary
to reason and sense both, even all men, have both against light
and feeling, rejected their own happiness; as Paul saith, "Who
knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things
are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in
them that do them" (Rom 1:31).

(3.) Man, instead of doing equity, and as he would be done by,
which nature itself teacheth: he hath given up himself to vile
affections, being filled, by refusing the dictates of nature,
"with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity;
whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters,
inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding,
covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful"
(Rom 1:29-31).

And observe it, he doth not say, that all these things are by every
man put into practice; but every man hath all these in his heart,
which there defile the soul, and make it abominable in the sight
of God. They are filled with all unrighteousness, which also appears,
as occasion serveth, sometimes one of them, sometimes more. Now,
man having sinned against that natural light, judgment, reason,
and conscience, that God hath given him; therefore, though as I
said before, he neither knew Moses nor Christ, yet he shall perish.
"As many," saith Paul, "as have sinned without law, shall also
perish without law" (Rom 2:12).

Yea, here will man be found not only a sinner against God, but an
opposer of himself, a contradictor of his own nature, and one that
will not do that which he judgeth even of himself to be right (2
Tim 2:25). Their sin is written upon the tables of their own heart
(Jer 17:1), and their own wickedness and backsliding shall both
correct and reprove them (Jer 2:19).

It is marvellous, if we consider, how curious a creature man was made
of God; to behold how much below, besides, and against that state
and place, man acts and does in this state of sin and degeneracy.
Man in his creation was made in the image of God (Gen 1:26), but
man, by reason of his yielding to the tempter, hath made himself
the very figure and image of the devil. Man by creation was made
upright and sinless; but man by sin, hath made himself crooked
and sinful (Eccl 7:29). Man by creation had all the faculties of
his soul at liberty to study God his creator, and his glorious
attributes and being; but man by sin, hath so bound up his own
senses and reason; and hath given way for blindness and ignorance
of God, so to reign in his soul; that now he is captivated and
held bound in alienation and estrangedness both from God, and all
things truly spiritually good; "Because," saith he, "that when
they knew God, they glorified him not as God,--but became vain
in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened"
(Rom 1:21). And again, "Having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their hearts" (Eph 4:18).

Now, for this abuse of the workmanship of God, shall man be brought
forth to the judgment, shall be convicted, cast, and condemned as
a rebel, against both God and his own soul, as Paul affirmeth,
and that when he reasoned but as a man (Rom 3:5,6).

When this part of the book touching man's nature is opened, and
man convicted and cast by it, by reason of his sinning against
the three general principles thereof:

II. Then forthwith is the second part of the book opened, which
is the mystery of the creatures; for the whole creation, that
is before thee, are not only made to shew the power of God in
themselves; but also to teach thee, and to preach unto thee, both
much of God and thyself; as also the righteousness, and justice
of God against sin; "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold
the truth in unrighteousness; Because that which may be known of
God is manifest in them; for God hath shewed it unto them. For
the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse"
(Rom 1:18-20).

1. The creation then of the world, namely, of the heavens, earth,
sun, moon, stars, with all other the creatures of God: they preach
aloud to all men, the eternal power and Godhead of their Creator
(Psa 8:3). In wisdom he hath made them all (Psa 104:24): to be
teachable, and carrying instruction in them; and he that is wise,
and will understand these things, even he shall understand the
loving-kindness of the Lord; for "the works of the Lord are great,
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein" (Psa 107;
111:2).

2. As the creation in general preacheth to every man something of
God; so they do hold forth, how man should behave himself both to
God, and one to another; and will assuredly come in, in the judgment,
against all those that shall be found crossers, and thwarters of
what God by the creatures doth hold forth to us.

(1.) As First, The obedience of the creatures, both to God and
thee. (a.) To God, they are all in subjection (set devils and men
aside) even the very dragons, and all deeps, fire, hail, snow,
and vapours (Psa 148:7,8), fulfilling his word. Yea, the winds
and seas obey him (Mark 4:41). Thus, I say, by their obedience to
God they teach thee obedience, and by their obedience shall thy
disobedience be condemned in the judgment (Psa 147:15-18). (b.)
Their obedience to thee, also teacheth thee obedience to all
superiors; for every kind of beasts, and of birds, and serpents,
and things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed, and brought
into obedience by mankind. Man only remains untamed and unruly,
and therefore by these is condemned (James 3:7,8).

(2.) The fruitfulness of all the creatures in their kind, doth
teach and admonish thee to a fruitful life to Godward, and in the
things of his holy word. God did but say in the beginning, Let
the earth bring forth fruit, grass, herbs, trees, beasts, creeping
things, and cattle after their kind; and it was so (Gen 1:24).
But to man, he hath sent his prophets, rising early, and sending
them, saying, "O do not this abominable thing that I hate" (Jer
44:4). but they will not obey. For if the Gentiles, which have not
the law, do, by some acts of obedience, condemn the wickedness of
those who do by the letter and circumcision, break the law: how
much more shall the fruitfulness of all the creatures come in,
in the judgment, against the whole world! As Job saith, By the
obedience and fruitfulness of the creatures he judgeth, and so will
judge, the people (Job 36:27-32).

(3.) The knowledge and wisdom of the creatures, do with a check,
command thee to be wise, and do teach thee wisdom. The stork in
the heaven, the swallow and the crane, by observing the time and
season of their coming, do admonish thee to learn the time of
grace, and of the mercy of God (Jer 8:7). The ox and the ass, by
the knowledge they have of their master's crib, do admonish thee
to know the bread and table of God, and both do and shall condemn
thy ignorance of the food of heaven (Isa 1:3).

(4.) The labour and toil of the creatures doth convict thee of
sloth and idleness. "Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her
ways, and be wise;" for she provideth her food in the summer, and
layeth up against the day of trial (Prov 6:6,7). But thou spendest
the whole summer of thy life in wasting both time and soul. All
things are full of labour, saith Solomon (Eccl 1:8), only man
spendeth all the day idle (Matt 20:6), and his years like a tale
that is told (Psa 90:9; Rom 10:21). The coney is but a feeble
folk, yet laboureth for a house in the rock, to be safe from the
rage of the hunter (Prov 30:26).

The spider also, taketh hold with her hands, and is in king's palaces
(Prov 30:28). It is man only that turneth himself upon the bed of
sloth, as the door doth itself upon the hinges. 'Tis man, I say,
that will neither lay hold on the rock Christ, as the coney doth
teach, nor lay hold on the kingdom of heaven, as the spider doth
bid him (John 5:40).

(5.) The fear that is in all creatures, when they perceive that
danger is near, it teacheth men to fly from the wrath to come,
"In vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird" (Prov 1:17),
but man, man only is the fool-hardy creature, that lieth wait for
his own blood, and that lurketh privily for his own life. How I
say, will every creature fly, run, strive, and struggle to escape
the danger it is sensible of! 'Tis man only that delighteth to
dance about the mouth of hell, and to be knowingly smitten with
Satan's snare (Rom 1:32).

(6.) The dependence that all the creatures have upon God; they
teach thee to depend on him that made thee; yea, and will in the
judgment condemn thee for thy unlawful practices, and dealings for
thy preservation. The young ravens seek their food from God (Psa
147:9; Job 38:41), and will condemn thy lying, cheating, overreaching,
defrauding, and the like. They provide neither storehouse, nor
barn (Luke 12:24); but thou art so greedy of these things, that
thou for them shuttest thyself out of the kingdom of heaven (Prov
17:16).

(7.) The love and pity that is in their hearts to their young,
and one another: will judge and condemn the hard-heartedness that
is in thee to thy own soul. What shall I say? "The heaven shall
reveal his iniquity; and the earth shall rise up against him" (Job
20:27). That is, all the creatures of God, they will, by their
fruitfulness and subjection to the will of their Creator, judge
and condemn thee for thy disobedience, and rebellion against him.

3. Now, as these creatures do every day call unto thee, and lay
before thee these things: so he hath for thy awakening, in case
thou be asleep, and senseless, creatures of another nature; as,

(1.) Thy bed, when thou liest down in it, preacheth to thee thy
grave; thy sleep, thy death; and thy rising in the morning, thy
resurrection to judgment (Job 14:12; 17:13; Isa 26:19).

(2.) The jail that thou seest with thine eyes, and the felons that
look out at the grate, they put thee in mind of the prison of hell,
and of the dreadful state of those that are there (Luke 12:58,59).

(3.) The fire that burns in thy chimney, it holds forth the fire
of hell unto thee (Isa 10:16; Rev 20:14).

(4.) The ugly smell, stench, and steam, of the burning brimstone,
it shews thee the loathsome, odious, and dreadful torments of hell
(Rev 19:20).

(5.) The darkness of the night in solitary places, and the fears
that do commonly haunt those that walk therein: it preacheth to
thee the fears and frights, the scares and amazements, that will
for ever attend all damned souls (Matt 8:12; Deu 28:65-67).

(6.) By thy delighting, when thou art cold, to lay sticks on the
fire to warm thyself, not caring how fiercely they flame therein,
so thou canst be warm and be refreshed thereby, by this, I say,
God preacheth to thee, with what delight he will burn sinners in
the flames of hell, for the easing of his mind, and the satisfaction
of his justice. "Ah," saith he, "I will ease me of mine adversaries,
and avenge me of mine enemies" (Isa 1:24).

(4.) Yea, by thy blowing the fire, that it may fasten upon the wood
the better; thou preachest to thyself how God will blow the fire
of hell by the rigour of his law, to the end, it may by its flames,
to purpose, kindle upon damned sinners (Isa 30:33).

All these things, as inconsiderable and unlikely as they may appear to
you now, yet in the judgment will be found the items, and warning
words of God to your souls. And know, that he who could overthrow
the land of Egypt with frogs, lice, flies, locusts, &c., will
overthrow the world, at the last day, by the book of the creatures;
and that by the least and most inconsiderable of them, as well as
by the rest. This book of the creatures, it is so excellent, and
so full, so easy, and so suiting the capacity of all, that there
is not one man in the world but is catched, convicted, and cast
by it. This is the book, that he who knows no letters may read
in; yea, and that he who neither saw New Testament, nor Old, may
know both much of God, and himself by. 'Tis this book, out of which
generally, both Job and his friends did so profoundly discourse
of the judgments of God; and that out of which God himself did so
convincingly answer Job. Job was as perfect in this book, as we
are, many of us in the scriptures; yea, and could see further by
it, than many now adays do see by the New Testament and Old. This
is the book out of which, both Christ, the prophets, and apostles,
do so frequently discourse by their similitudes, proverbs, and
parables, as being the most easy way to convince the world, though
by reason of their ignorance, nothing will work with them, but
what is set on their heart by the Holy Ghost.

One word further, and I have done with this, and that is, God hath
sealed the judgment of the world by the book of the creatures;
even by man's own carriage unto such of them, which, through any
impediment, have disappointed his expectations. As thus: if thou
hast but a tree in thy orchard, that neither beareth fruit, nor
aught else that is good; why, thou art for hewing it down, and
for appointing it, as fuel for the fire. Now thou little thinkest
that by thy thus judging thou shouldst pass sentence upon thy own
fruitless soul; but it is so; "And now also the axe is laid unto
the root of the trees, therefore every tree which bringeth not
forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire." For as
truly as thou sayest of thy fruitless tree, Cut it down, why doth
it cumber the ground? so truly doth thy voice cause heaven to echo
again upon thy head, Cut him down; why doth he cumber the ground?
(Matt 3:10; Luke 13:6-8; Eze 15:1-6).11

Further, the inclination of thy heart towards fruitless and
unprofitable creatures, doth fore-preach to thee, the inclination
of the heart of God towards thee in the judgment. If thou hast
either cow, or any other beast, that is now unprofitable to thee,
though thou mayst suffer them for some time to be with thee, as
God suffereth sinners in the world, yet all this while thy heart
is not with them, but thou wilt take thy time to clear thy hands
of them. Why, just so shall thy judgment be, as God saith, "Though
Moses and Samuel stood before me," that is, to pray me to spare this
people, "yet my mind could not be towards this people: cast them
out of my sight, and let them go forth" (Jer 15:1; Eze 14:13,14).

Thus I say, will God judge the world at the last day; he will open
before them, how they have degenerated and gone back from the
principles of nature in which he created them. Also how they have
slighted all the instructions that he hath given them, even by the
obedience, fruitfulness, wisdom, labour, fear, and love of the
creatures; and he will tell them, that as to their judgment, they
themselves have decided it, both by their cutting down that which
was fruitless, and by the withdrawing of their hearts from those
things, which to them were unprofitable, "As therefore the tares
are gathered, and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end
of the world." As men deal with weeds, and rotten wood: so will
God deal with sinners in the day of judgment: and will bring in,
I say, all the counsels and warnings he hath given men by these
things, both to clear up and to aggravate their judgment to them.

Second. The second book that will be opened at this day, it will
be the book of God's remembrance (Mal 3:16). For as God hath in
his remembrance, recorded all and every particular good thing that
his own people hath done to, and for his name while they were in
this world: so he hath in his remembrance, recorded all the evil
and sin of his adversaries, even everything (Eccl 12:14). Now
God's remembrance is so perfect every way, that it is impossible
that anything should be lost, that is committed to it to be kept,
and brought forth to the judgment at the time appointed; for as
a thousand years are but as yesterday, with his eternity: so the
sins that have been committed thousands of years since, they are
all so firmly fixed in the remembrance of the eternal God, that
they are always as fresh and clear in his sight, as if they were
but just now in committing. He calleth again the things that are
past (Eccl 3:15), and hath set "our [most] secret sins in the
light of his countenance" (Psa 90:8). As he also saith in another
place, "Hell [itself] is naked before him, and destruction hath
no covering" (Job 26:6), that is, the most secret, cunning, and
hidden contrivances of the most subtle of the infernal spirits,
which yet are far more slethy,12 than men, to hide their wickedness;
yet, I say, all their ways, hearts, and most secret doings, are
clear, to the very bottom of them, in the eyes of the great God.
All things are open and bare before the eyes of him with whom we
have to do; who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and will make manifest the counsels of the heart (Heb 4:13; 1 Cor
4:5).

"Ye that say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it. Understand, [O] ye brutish among the people: and
ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall
he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see? he that
chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man
knowledge, shall not he know?" (Psa 94:8-10; Hosea 7:2; 8:13). "Can
any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him?"--that
is, when he is committing wickedness--"saith the Lord: Do not I
fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord" (Jer 23:24).

Now to know and see things, it is the cause among men of their
remembrance. Wherefore, God to shew us, that he will remember all
our sins if we die out of Christ, he tells us, that he knoweth,
and seeth them all, and therefore must needs remember them; for
as is his sight and knowledge, so is his remembrance of all things.

When this book of his remembrance therefore is opened, as it shall
be, in the judgment, then shall be brought forth of their hidden
holes, all things, whatsoever hath been done since the world
began, whether by kingdoms in general, or persons in particular.
Now also shall be brought forth to open view, all the transactions
of God and his Son, among the sons of men, and everything shall
be applied to every particular person, in equity and justice,
to whom they belong: the sins that thou hast committed shall be
thy own, and thou thyself shalt bear them. "The Lord is a God of
knowledge, and by him actions are weighed" (1 Sam 2:3).

It will be marvellous to behold how by thousands, and ten thousands,
God will call from their secret places, those sins, that one would
have thought, had been dead, and buried, and forgotten; yea, how
he will shew before the sun, such things, so base and so horrid,
that one would think, it was not in the hearts of any to commit;
for all is recorded in the book of God's remembrance. While men
are here, they have a thousand tricks to present themselves one to
another, far more fair, and honest than they are, or ever were. As
Christ said to the Pharisees, "Ye are they which justify yourselves
before men: but God knoweth your hearts" (Luke 16:15): Ay, God
knoweth, indeed, what a nest, what a heap, what swarms; yea, what
legions of hellish wickednesses, there are with power lurking,
like cockatrices, in those men, that one would swear a thousand
times, are good and honest men. The way of men in their sins, it
is like "an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent upon a rock, the
way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with
a maid," saith Solomon (Prov 30:19), that is, hiddenly, closely,
covertly, burying all under fair pretences, wipeth their mouths
in the close of their evil, saying, "I have done [no] wickedness"
(Prov 30:20).

But this, though it may serve for the time present, and no longer,
God will not be deluded, nor blinded, nor mocked, nor put off (Gal
6:7). "They consider not--that I remember all their wickedness"
(Hosea 7:2); saith he, "but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes" (Psa 50:21). Here will be laid open the
very heart of Cain the murderer, of Judas the traitor, of Saul the
adversary of David, and of those that under pretences of holiness
have persecuted Christ, his word, and people. Now shall every
drunkard, whoremaster, thief, and other wicked person, be turned
their inside outward; their hearts right open, and every sin,
with every circumstance of place, time, person with whom, with
the causes also that drew them to the commission of every evil,
be discovered to all. Here will be no hiding yourselves behind
curtains, nor no covering yourselves with the black and dark night.
"If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall
be light about me: Yea," O God, "darkness hideth not from thee;
but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are
both alike to thee" (Psa 139:11,12).

The piercing eye of God, beholds all places, persons, and things;
the holy hand of his justice writeth them down in the book of his
remembrance; and by his power and wisdom, will he open and read
to all men exactly, distinctly, and convincingly, whatever hath
passed from them, or been done by them, in their whole life; for,
"For all these things God will bring thee into judgment" (Eccl
11:9). Again, as God will bring out of the book of his remembrance,
whatever hath passed from thee against him; so also will he then
bring forth by the same book, all things and carriages of his
towards thee.

Here will he bring to thy mind, every sermon thou hast heard,
every chapter thou hast read; every conviction thou hast had on
thy conscience; and every admonition that hath been given thee in
all thy life, when thou wast in the land of the living.

Now will God lay open before thee, what patience he extended to
thee, how he let thee live one year, two years, ten, yea, twenty
and twenty years, 13 and all to try thee. Yea, now also will he
bring to thy view, how many times he warned, rebuked, threatened,
and chastised thee for thy wickedness; how many awakening providences
and judgments he continually laid before thy face; yea, how many
a time thou didst, like Balaam, run upon the point of the sword
of justice, and how he gave back, as being loath to kill thee (Num
22:23-34).

Now also again, shall be brought before thee and all men, how many
strugglings God had with thy heart, on thy sick-bed, to do thee good;
yea, and at such times, how many vows, promises, engagements, and
resolutions thou madest before God, to turn, if he would release
thee from thy affliction, and take off his rod from thy back; and
yet, how thou didst, like the man possessed (Mark 5:1-5), break
and snap in twain all these chains of iron, with which thou hadst
bound thy soul, and that for a very lust and sin. Here also, will
be opened before thee, how often thou hath sinned against thy light
and knowledge; how often thou hast laid violent hands on thy own
conscience; how often thou hast laboured to put out that light
that hath stood in thy way to hinder thee from sinning against
thy soul. Ah, Lord, what a condition will the Christless soul be
in at this day! how will every one of these things afflict the
damned soul! They will pierce like arrows, and bite like serpents,
and sting like an adder. With what shame, will that man stand before
the judgment-seat of Christ who must have all things he hath done
against God, to provoke the eyes of his glory to jealousy, laid
open before the whole host of the heavenly train! It would make a
man blush to have his pockets searched, for things that are stolen in
the midst of a market, especially, if he stand upon his reputation
and honour. But thou must have thy heart searched, the bottom of
thy heart searched; and that, I say, before thy neighbour whom
thou hast wronged, and before the devils whom thou hast served;
yea, before God, whom thou hast despised, and before the angels,
those holy and delicate creatures, whose holy and chaste faces
will scarce forbear blushing, while God is making thee vomit up,
all thou hast swallowed; for God shall bring it out of thy belly
(Job 20:12-15).

For as for God to forget iniquity, is one of the chief heads of the
covenant of grace, and is an argument of the highest nature, to
beget and to continue consolation in the godly: so the remembrance
of iniquity, by the Lord, it is one of the heaviest loads and
judgments, that can befall any poor creature. "Lord," saith the
prophet, "remember not against us former iniquities." And again,
"If thou, Lord, shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall
stand?" (Psa 130:3). And the reason is, because, that which the
Lord forgetteth, is forgiven for ever (Heb 8:12; Rom 4:6-8); but
that which he remembereth, it is charged for ever, and nothing
can take it away--"Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee
much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord
God" (Jer 2:22).

Third. The third book that will at this day be opened, and out
of which God will judge the world: it is the book of the law, or
ten words given forth on the Mount Sinai. But this book will more
specially concern those that have received it, or that have had
knowledge thereof. Every one shall not be judged by this book, as
there delivered, though they shall be judged by the works of it,
which are written in their hearts. "As many as have sinned without
law, shall also perish without law: and as many as have sinned
in the law, shall be judged by the law" (Rom 2:12). That is, the
heathens that never knew the law, as delivered on Sinai, they
shall be judged by the law, as it was written in man's heart in
his creation, which is comprised within the book of the creatures,
but those that have knowledge of the law, as delivered on Sinai:
they shall be judged by the law as there given.

Now then, this book when it is opened at the day of judgment, it
will to those to whom it especially relates, be a most terrible
law, far surpassing the two afore-mentioned. This law, as I may
so say, it is the chief and most pure resemblance of the justice
and holiness of the heavenly majesty, and doth hold forth to all
men the sharpness and keenness of his wrath above the other two
that I have before mentioned. I say, both because it hath been
delivered more plain and open, both as to the duty enjoined, and
the sin prohibited; and therefore must of necessity, fall with
the more violence upon the head of all that shall be found within
the compass of it. This law, it hath in it to be opened at this
day, these two general heads:

1. A discovery of the evil of sin, that is so, against plain light
and truth; and, secondly, a discovery of the vanity of all things,
that will at this day be brought by sinners for their help and plea
at the judgment. Alas, who can but imagine, that the poor world,
at the day of their arraignment, should muster up all that ever
they can think of, as arguments to shelter them from the execution
of that fierce wrath, that then, with sinking souls, they will
see prepared for them.

As to the first of these, the apostle tells us that "the law entered,
that the offence might abound" (Rom 5:20), or be discovered what
it is. As he saith again, "I had not known sin, but by the law"
(Rom 7:7,13). Thus it is in this life, and thus it will be in
the day of judgment, that is, those that see sin, and that in its
abounding nature, and in its exceeding sinfulness, they must see
it by the law, for that is indeed the glass by which God discovereth
sin, and the filthy spots of leprosy, that are in the soul (James
1:22-25). Now those that have not the happiness to see their sin by
the law in this life, while there is a fountain of grace to wash
in, and be clean; they must have the misery to see it at the judgment,
when nothing is left but misery and pain, as the punishment for
the same. At which day, those little tittles of this holy law, that
now men so easily look over, and sin against with ease, they will
every one of them appear with such dread, and with such flaming
justice against every offence committed; that if heaven and earth
itself, should step in to shelter the sinner from the justice and
wrath due to sin, it would turn them up by the roots. "It is easier
for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle of the law to fail"
(Luke 16:17). If there appeared such flames, such thunderings,
and tempests, as there were at the giving of the law; what flames
and blackness will there appear at the execution thereof! And
if at the giving of the law there appeared so much holiness and
justice, that it made all Israel fly; yea, holy Moses "exceedingly
fear and quake," what will become of these that God shall judge
by the rigour of this law in the day of judgment? (Exo 19:16; Heb
12:21).

O what thunderings and lightnings, what earthquakes and tempests,
will there be in every damned soul, at the opening of this book?
Then, indeed, will God visit them "with thunder, and with earthquake,
and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring
fire" (Isa 29:6). "For behold," saith the prophet, "the Lord will
come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render
his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire" (Isa
66:15).

The Lord will come with fire, that is, in the flaming heat of his
justice and holiness against sin, and sinners, to execute the
rigour of his threatenings upon their perishing souls.

2. The second general head, that is contained in this law, to be
opened at this day is, its exactness, and purity, and strictness as
to all acts of good that any poor creature hath done in this life,
whereby he in the judgment will think to shelter, or secure himself
from the wrath of God. This is the rule, and line, and plummet,
whereby every act of every man shall be measured (Rom 3:21,22);
and he whose righteousness is not found every way answerable to
this law, which all will fall short of, but they that have the
righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ: he must perish, as
he saith, "Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness
to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies,
and the waters shall overflow the hiding place" (Isa 28:17). That
is, though men may not shelter themselves under legal repentance,
cold profession, good meaning, thinkings, and doings: yet all these
things must be measured, and weighed in the balance of God's most
righteous law: and, as I said, whatever in that day is not found
the righteousness of God, it will be found a refuge of lies, and
will be drowned by the overflowing of the wrath of God, as the
waters of Noah overflowed the world. And hence it is that all the
ungodly will at this day, be found as stubble, and the law as fire
(Mal 4:1). As it saith, "From his right hand went a fiery law"
(Deu 33:2). And again, "His lips are full of indignation, and
his tongue as a devouring fire" (Isa 30:27). For as fire, where
it seizeth, doth burn, eat, destroy, devour and consume: so will
the law, all those that at this day, shall be found under the
transgression of the least tittle of it. It will be with these
souls at the day of judgment, as it is with those countries that
are overrun with most merciless conquerors, who leave not anything
behind them, but swallow up all with fire and sword. "For by fire,
and by his sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the
slain of the Lord shall be many" (Isa 66:16). There are two things
at the day of judgment, will meet in their height and utmost
strength, and they are sin and the law; for the judgment will not
be, till the iniquity of the world be full ripe (Joel 3:13; Rev
14:15-20).

Now then, when sin is come to its full, having played all its pranks,
and done all the mischief it can against the Lord of glory: then
God brings forth the law, his holy and righteous law, one of which
will now reign for ever, that is, either the law or sin: wherefore
sin and sinners, they must tremble, with all that help, and hold
them up; for God "will magnify the law, and make it honourable"
(Isa 42:21). That is, will give it the victory over the world for
ever; for that is holy, just, and good; they are unholy, unjust,
and bad. Therefore by this law "the Lord shall rain snares, fire,
and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion
of their cup" (Psa 11:6). Let no man say then, that because God
is so famous in his mercy and patience, in this day of his grace,
that therefore he will not be fierce, and dreadful in his justice,
in the day of judgment; for judgment and justice, are the last
things that God intends to bring upon the stage, which will then
be to the full, as terrible, as now his goodness and patience,
and long-sufferance are admirable. Lord, "who knoweth the power
of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath" (Psa
90:11).

You may see, if you will, a few of the sparks of the justice of
God against sin and sinners. By his casting off angels for sin,
from heaven to hell; by his drowning the old world; by his burning
of Sodom and Gomorrah, to ashes; condemning them with an overthrow,
making them an example to those that after should live ungodly (2
Peter 2:4-6; Jude 6,7).

For "what things soever the law saith, it saith to them who are
under the law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world
may become guilty before God" (Rom 3:19).

Moses seems to wonder, that the children of Israel could continue to
live, when they did but hear the law delivered on the mountain--"Did
ever people," saith he, "hear the voice of God speaking out of
the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?" (Deu 4:33).
O that ye did but know the law, and the wondrous things that are
written therein, before the Lord cause that fearful voice to be
heard--"Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things that
are written in the book of the law to do them" (Gal 3:10); which
curse must fall on all that walk not in all the commandments of
God without iniquity (Eze 33:15); which none do, I say, but they
that walk in Christ, who hath alone fulfilled them all (Col 2:10).

The law is that which standeth at the entrance of the paradise of
God, as a flaming sword, turning every way to keep out those that
are not righteous with the righteousness of God (Gen 3:24); that
have not skill to come to the throne of grace by that new and
living way which he hath consecrated for us through the veil; that
is to say, his flesh (Heb 10:20), for though this law, I say, be
taken away by Christ Jesus, for all that truly and savingly believe
(Col 2:14); yet it remains in full force and power, in every tittle
of it, against every soul of man, that now shall be found in his
tabernacle, that is, in himself, and out of the Lord Jesus (Rom
3:19); it lieth, I say, like a lion rampant at the gates of heaven,
and will roar upon every unconverted soul, fiercely accusing every
one that now would gladly enter in through the gates into this
city (Job 18:14; John 5:45). So, then, he that can answer all its
most perfect and legal commands, and that can live in the midst of
devouring fire, and there enjoy God and solace himself, he shall
dwell on high, and shall not be hurt by this law--"His place
of defence shall be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be given
him; his waters shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see the king in
his beauty: they shall behold the land that is very far off" (Isa
33:16,17). Blessed then is he whose righteousness doth answer
every point of the law of God, according to 1 Corinthians 1:30 he
shall be able to escape all those things that shall come to pass,
and to stand before the Son of man; for in himself, our God is a
consuming fire, and man out of Christ, is but as stubble, chaff,
thorns, briars, and fuel for the wrath of this holy and sinner-consuming
God to seize upon for ever (Heb 12:29; Mal 4:1; Matt 3:12; Heb 6:8;
Isa 27:4; 2 Sam 23:6,7). "Who can stand before his indignation?
And who can abide the fierceness of his anger? His fury is poured
out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him" (Nahum 1:6).

Now when these three books are thus opened, there will without
doubt, be sad throbbing and pricking, in every heart that now stands
for his life, before the judgment-seat of Christ, the righteous
Judge; and without all question, they will be studying a thousand
ways to evade and shift the stroke, that by the sin that these
three books do charge them with, will immediately fall upon them.

But now to cut off all these at a blow, forthwith appear the
witnesses, who are ready to evince, and make full and soul-killing
proof of every particular charged against them.

[First Witness.]--and the first is God himself. "I," saith he,
"will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that
oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless,
and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me,
saith the Lord of hosts" (Mal 3:5).

This must needs be of great sway with every soul, that God should
now come in. I will witness, saith God, that these things of which
you are accused before the Judge are true. I have seen all, know
all, and write down all. There hath not been a thought in your
heart, nor a word in your tongue, but I have known it altogether;
all things have always been open and naked to mine eye (Heb 4:13).
Yea, my eyelids try the children of men (Psa 11:4). I have known
your down-sitting, and your up-rising; and have understood your
thoughts afar off. I have compassed your path, and am well acquainted
with all your ways (Psa 139:1-3).

1. You have not continued in that state of nature in which I did
at first create you (Eccl 7:29); you have not liked to retain that
knowledge and understanding of God, that you had, and might have
had, by the very book of the creatures (Rom 1). You gave way to
the suggestions of fallen angels, and so your foolish hearts were
darkened and alienated, and estranged from God.

2. All the creatures that were in the world, have even condemned
you; they have been fruitful, but you fruitless; they have been
fearful of danger, but you foolhardy; they have taken the fittest
opportunity for their own preservation, but thou hast both blindly,
and confidently gone on to thy punishment (Prov 22:3).

3. Touching the book of my remembrance, who can contradict it?
Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord. Was not I in all
places to behold, to see, and to observe thee in all thy ways? My
eye saw the thief, and the adulterer, and I heard every lie and
oath of the wicked. I saw the hypocrisy of the dissembler. "They
have committed villany in Israel, and have committed adultery with
their neighbours' wives, and have spoken lying words in my name,
which I have not commanded them; even I know, and am a witness,
saith the Lord" (Jer 29:23).

4. God will also come in against them for their transgressing his
law, even the law which he delivered on Mount Sinai; he will, I
say, open every tittle thereof in such order and truth: and apply
the breach of each particular person with such convincing argument,
that they will fall down silenced for ever--"Every mouth shall be
stopped, and all the world shall become guilty before God" (Rom
3:19).

[Second Witness.]--There is yet another witness, for the condemning
the transgressors of these laws, and that is, conscience--"Their
conscience also bearing witness," saith the apostle (Rom 2:15).
Conscience is a thousand witnesses. Conscience, it will cry amen to
every word that the great God doth speak against thee. Conscience
is a terrible accuser, it will hold pace with the witness of God
as to the truth of evidence, to a hair's breadth. The witnesses
of conscience, it is of great authority, it commands guilt,14
and fasteneth it on every soul which it accuseth; and hence it is
said, "If our heart [or conscience] condemn us" (1 John 3:20).
Conscience will thunder and lighten at this day; even the consciences
of the most pagan sinners in the world, will have sufficiently
wherewith to accuse, to condemn, and to make paleness appear in
their faces, and breaking in their loins, by reason of the force
of its conviction. Oh, the mire and dirt, that a guilty conscience,
when it is forced to speak, will cast up, and throw out before the
judgment-seat! It must out, none can speak peace, nor health, to
that man upon whom God hath let loose his own conscience. Cain
will now cry, "My punishment is greater than I can bear;" Judas
will hang himself; and both Belshazzar and Felix will feel the
joints of their loins to be loosened, and their knees to smite one
against another, when conscience stirreth (Gen 4:13; Matt 27:3;
Dan 5:6; Acts 24:23). When conscience is once thoroughly awakened,
as it shall be before the judgment-seat: God need say no more to
the sinner than Solomon said to filthy Shimei, "thou knowest all
the wickedness which thine heart is privy to" (1 Kings 2:44). As
who should say, Thy conscience knoweth, and can well inform thee
of all the evil, and sin that thou art guilty of. To all which
it answereth, even as face answereth to face in a glass; or as
an echo answereth the man that speaketh; as fast, I say, as God
chargeth conscience will cry out, Guilty, guilty; Lord, guilty of
all, of every whit; I remember clearly all the crimes thou layest
before me. Thus, I say, will conscience be a witness against the
soul, in the day of God.

[Third Witness.]--As God and conscience will at this day be most
dreadful witnesses against the sinful man; so also will those several
thoughts that have passed through man's heart, be a witness also
against him. As he said before, "Their conscience also baring witness,
and their thoughts the meanwhile accusing, or else excusing one
another; In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ according to my gospel" (Rom 2:15,16).

The thoughts come in as a witness for God against the sinner upon
the account of that unsteadiness and variety that were in them,
both touching God, and their own selves. Sometimes the man thinks
there is no God, but that everything hath its rise of itself, or
by chance, or fortune--"The fool hath said in his heart, There is
no God" (Psa 14:1).

Sometimes, again, they think there is a God, but yet they think
and imagine of him falsely. "Thou thoughtest that I was altogether
such an one as thyself," saith God; "but I will reprove thee" (Psa
50:21).

Men think, that because they can sin with delight: that therefore
God can let them escape without punishment. Nay, oftentimes they
think, that God doth either quite forget their wickedness, or
else that he will be pleased with such satisfaction as they are
pleased to give him, even a few howling prayers (Hosea 7:14),
feigned and hypocritical tears, and weepings, which pass from them
more for fear of the punishment of hell-fire, than because they
have offended so holy, so just, and so glorious a God, and so
loving and so condescending a Jesus (Mal 2:13).

Sometimes again, they have had right thoughts of something of God,
but not of him together; either thinking so of his justice, as to
drive them from him, and also cause them to put him out of their
mind (Job 21:14). Or else so thinking of his mercy as that they
quite forget his holiness and justice. Now both these are but base
thoughts of God, and so erroneous, and sinful thoughts.

Sometimes also, they have pretty right thoughts of God, both as
to justice and mercy, but then, through the wretchedness of their
unsatisfied nature, they, against this light and knowledge, do,
with shut eyes, and hardened hearts, rush fiercely, knowingly, and
willingly again into their sins and wickedness (Heb 6:4-6; 10:26;
2 Peter 2:20).

As men have these various thoughts of God, so also their thoughts
are not steady about themselves.

Sometimes they think they are sinners, and therefore they have need
of mercy.

Sometimes again, they think they are righteous, and so have not
so much need; mark, and yet both alike rotten and base; because,
as the last is altogether senseless, so the first is not at all
savingly sensible (Mark 10:17-22; Luke 18:11,12).

Sometimes again, they think they are gods (Eze 28:1-6); that they
shall never die; or that if they do die, yet they shall never rise
again (1 Cor 15:12); or if they do rise again, yet they shall be
saved, though they have lived vilely and in their sins all the
days of their life (Deu 29:18-20). Now, I say, every one of these
thoughts, with ten thousand more of the like nature, will God
bring in against the rebels in the judgment-day. Which thoughts
shall every one of them be brought forth in their distinct order.
He sheweth to man what is his thought (Amos 4:13). And, again, "I
know that thou canst do every thing, and that no thought can be
with-holden from thee" (Job 42:2). We read, that when the strangers
at Jerusalem did but hear the apostles speak to every one of them
in their own language, how it amazed and confounded them (Acts
2:6-8). But, I say, how will they look and be amazed when God
shall evidently, clearly, and fully speak out all their hearts,
and every thought they have had before them!

Now the reason and strength of this witness will lie here, that God
will by the variety and crossness that their thoughts had one to
another, and by the contradiction that was in them, prove them
sinners and ungodly; because that, I say, sometimes they thought
there was a God, sometimes again, they thought there was none.
Sometimes they thought, that he was such a God, and sometimes
again, they thought of him quite contrary; sometimes they thought
he was worth regarding, and sometimes they thought he was not; as
also, sometimes they thought he would be faithful, both to mercy,
and justice, and sinners; and sometimes again, they thought he
would not.

What greater argument now can there be, to prove men, vanity,
froth, a lie, sinners, deluded by the devil, and such as had
false apprehensions of God, his ways, his word, his justice, his
holiness, of themselves, their sins, and every action?

Now they will indeed appear a very lump of confusion, a mass of
sin, a bundle of ignorance, of atheism, of unbelief, and of all
things that should lay them obnoxious to the judgments of God.
This will God, I say, by mustering up the thoughts of man, and
by shewing of them, that every imagination and thought of their
heart was only evil, and that continually, (by shewing of them
what staggering, drunken, wild, and uncomely thoughts they have
had, both of him, and of themselves,) convince them, cast them,
and condemn them for sinners, and transgressors against the book
of creatures, the book of his remembrance, and the book of the law.
By the variety of their thoughts, they shall be proved unstable,
ignorant, wandering stars, clouds carried with a tempest, without
order or guidance, and taken captive of the devil at his will.

Now, while the wicked are thus standing upon their trial and lives
before the judgment-seat, and that in the view of heaven and hell,
they, I say, hearing and seeing such dreadful things, both written
and witnessed against every one of them, and that by such books
and such witnesses as do not only talk, but testify, and that with
the whole strength of truth against them: they will then begin,
though poorly, and without any advantage, to plead for themselves,
which plea will be to this effect.

Lord, we did find in the scriptures, that thou didst send a Saviour
into the world, to deliver us from these sins and miseries. We
heard this Saviour also published, and openly proffered to such
poor sinners as we are. Lord, Lord, we also made profession of this
Saviour, and were many of us frequenters of his holy ordinances.
We have eaten and drank in thy presence, and thou hast taught in
our streets. Lord, we have also some of us, been preachers ourselves,
we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have we cast out
devils, and done many wondrous works. Nay, Lord, we did herd among
thy people; we forsook the profane and wicked world, and carried
our shining lamps before us in the face of all men; Lord, Lord,
open to us (Matt 7:21-23; 25:1,2,10,11; Luke 13:24-28).

And all the while they are thus pleading, and speaking for themselves:
behold, how earnestly they groan, how ghastly they look, and how
now the brinish tears flow down like rivers from their eyes, ever
redoubling their petition, Lord, Lord, Lord, Lord: first thinking
of this thing, and then of that, ever contending, seeking, and
striving to enter in at this strait gate. As Christ saith, "When
once the master of the house is risen up," that is, when Christ
hath laid aside his mediation for sinners, and hath taken upon
him only to judge and condemn; then will the wicked begin to stand
without, and to knock and contend for a portion among them that
are the blessed. Ah, how will their hearts twitter while they
look upon the kingdom of glory! and how will they ache and throb
at every view of hell, their proper place! still crying, O that
we might inherit life, and O that we might escape eternal death!

Fourth, But now, to take away all cavils and objections, that of
this nature will arise in the hearts of these men: forthwith the
book of life is brought out for a conclusion, and a final end
of eternal judgment. As John saith, "The books were opened; and
another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works" (Rev 20:12).

But this book of life, it is not at this time opened, because there
are not any godly to be tried; for as I have shewed before, their
judgment is past and over, before the wicked rise. The book of life,
then, is now opened for further conviction of damned reprobates,
that their mouths may be stopped for ever, as touching all their
cavils, contendings, and arguments against God's proceeding in
judgment with them. For believe it, while God is judging them,
they will fall to judging him again; but he will be justified in
his sayings, and will overcome when he is judged at this day (Rom
3:4-6). Yet not by a hasty and angry casting them away, but by
a legal and convincing proceeding against them, and overthrowing
all their cavils by his manifest and invincible truth. Wherefore,
to cut off all that they can say, he will now open the book of life
before them, and will shew them what is written therein, both as
to election, conversion, and a truly gospel conversation. And will
convince them that they neither are of the number of his elect,
neither were they ever regenerate, neither had they ever a truly
gospel conversation in the world.

By these three things, then, out of this book, thou, who art not
saved, must at last be judged and overcome.

1. Here will be tried, whether thou art within that part of this
book wherein all the elect are recorded; for all the elect are
written here, as Christ saith, "Rejoice, because your names are
written in heaven" (Luke 10:20); and again, "In thy book," saith
he to his Father, "all my members were written" (Psa 139:16; Heb
12:22,23). Now, then, if thy name be not found, either among the
prophets, apostles, or the rest of saints, thou must be put by,
as one that is cast away, as one polluted, and as an abominable
branch (Isa 14:19); thy name is wanting in the genealogies and
rolls of heaven (Ezra 2:62), thou art not pricked15 for everlasting
life, therefore thou must not be delivered from that soul-amazing
misery; for there are no souls can, though they would give a
thousand worlds, be delivered at the day of God but such that are
found written in this book. Every one of those that are written,
though never an one of those that are not written, shall in that
day be delivered from the wrath to come (Dan 12:1).

But, O methinks, with what careful hearts will the damned now begin
to look for their names in this book. Those that, when once the
long-suffering of God waited on them, made light of all admonition,
and slighted the counsel of making their calling and election
sure: would now give thousands of treasures, that they could but
spy their names, though last and least among the sons of God. But,
I say, how will they fail? how will they faint? how will they die
and languish in their souls? when they shall still as they look,
see their names wanting. What a pinch will it be to Cain to see
his brother there recorded, and he himself left out. Absalom will
now swoon, and be as one that giveth up the ghost, when he shall
see David his father, and Solomon his brother written here, while
he withal is written in the earth, among the damned. Thus, I say,
will sadness be added to sadness, in the soul of the perishing
world when they fail of finding their names in this part of "the
book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world"
(Rev 13:8).

2. The second part of this book, is that in which is recorded, the
nature of conversion, of faith, love, &c. And those that have not
had the effectual word of God upon them, and the true and saving
operation of grace in their hearts, which is indeed the true life
which is begun in every Christian, they will be found still not
written in this book; for the living, the holy living souls, are
they only that are written therein; as the prophet saith, "and
he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every
one that is written among the living in Jerusalem" (Isa 4:3):
Eternal life is already in this life, begun in every soul that
shall be saved; as Christ saith, "He that believeth in me hath
everlasting life." And again, "Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh
my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last
day" (John 6:54). And hence they are called the living, that are
written in this book. Here then, the Lord will open before thee,
what conversion is, in the true and simple nature of it, which
when thou beholdest, thou wilt then be convinced, that this thou
hast missed of; for it must needs be, that when thou beholdest by
the records of heaven, what a change what a turn; what an alteration
the work of regeneration maketh on every soul, and in every heart,
where the effectual call, or the call according to his purpose,
is; that thou who hast lived a stranger to this, or that hast
contented thyself with the notion only, or a formal, and feigned
profession thereof: I say, it cannot be but that thou must forthwith
fall down, and with grief conclude, that thou hast no share in
this part of the book of life neither, the living only are written
herein. There is not one dead, carnal, wicked man recorded here.
No; but when the Lord shall at this day make mention of Rahab, of
Babylon, of Philistia, and Ethiopia: that is, of all the cursed
rabble and crew of the damned: then he will say, that this man
was born there--that is, amongst them, and so hath his name where
they have theirs; namely, under the black rod, in the king's
black book, where he hath recorded all his enemies and traitors.
It shall be said of this man, of this ungodly man, that he was born
there (Psa 87:4), that he lived and died in the state of nature,
and so under the curse of God, even as others: for as he said of
wicked Coniah, "Write ye this man childless" (Jer 22:30), so he
saith of every ungodly man that so departeth out of this world,
Write this man graceless.

Wherefore, I say, among the Babylonians and Philistines; among the
unbelieving Moors and pagans, his name will be found in the day
when it will be inquired where every man was born; for God at this
day, will divide the whole world into these two ranks--the children
of the world, and the children of Zion. Wherefore here is the
honour, the privilege, and advantage that the godly above the
wicked will have at the day of their counting, when the Lord maketh
mention of Zion, it shall be then acknowledged that this and that
(good) man was born in her. "The Lord shall count," saith the
prophet, "when he writeth up the people, that this man was born
there" (Psa 87:6). This man had the work of conversion, of faith,
and grace in his soul. This man is a child of Zion, of the heavenly
Jerusalem, which is also written in heaven (Gal 4:26; Heb 12:23).
Blessed is the people that is in such a case (Psa 144:15).

But, poor soul, counters16 will not go for gold now; for though so
long as thou didst judge thyself by the crooked rule of thy own
reason, fancy, and affection, thou wast pure in thine own eyes:
yet now thou must be judged alone by the words and rule of the Lord
Jesus: which word shall not now, as in times past, be wrested and
wrung, both this way and that, to smooth thee up in thy hypocrite's
hope and carnal confidence; but be thou king or keser,17 be thou
who thou wilt, the word of Christ, and that with this interpretation
only, it shall judge thee in the last day (John 12:48).

Now will sinners begin to cry with loud and bitter cries, Oh! ten
thousand worlds for a saving work of grace. Crowns and kingdoms for
the least measure of saving faith, and for the love, that Christ
will say, is the love of his own Spirit.

Now they will begin also to see the work of a broken and a contrite
spirit, and of walking with God, as living stones, in this world. But
alas! these things appear in their hearts to the damned too late;
as also do all things else. This will be but like the repentance
of the thief, about whose neck is the halter, and he turning off
the ladder; for the unfortunate hap of the damned will be, that
the glory of heavenly things will not appear to them till out of
season. Christ must now indeed be shewed to them, as also the true
nature of faith and all grace; but it will be, when the door is
shut, and mercy gone. They will pray, and repent most earnestly;
but it will be in the time of great waters of the floods of eternal
wrath, when they cannot come nigh him (1 Tim 6:15; Matt 25:10,11;
Psa 32:6).

Well, then, tell me, sinner, if Christ should now come to judge the
world, canst thou abide the trial of the book of life? art thou
confident that thy profession, that thy conversion, thy faith,
and all other graces thou thinkest thou hast, will prove gold,
silver, and precious stones in this day? Behold, he comes as a
refiner's fire, and as fuller's soap. Shalt thou indeed abide the
melting and washing of this day? Examine, I say, beforehand, and
try thyself unfeignedly; for every one "that doth truth cometh
to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God" (John 3:21).

Thou sayest thou art a Christian, that also thou hast repented,
dost believe, and love the Lord Jesus; but the question is, whether
these things will be found of equal length, height, and breadth
with the book of life, or whether, when thou art weighed in the
balance, thou wilt yet be found wanting (Dan 5:27). How if, when
thou comest to speak for thyself before God, thou shouldst say
Sibboleth instead of Shibboleth: that is, though almost, yet not
rightly and naturally the language of the Christians (Judg 12:6).

If thou miss but one letter in thy evidence, thou art gone; for
though thou mayest deceive thy own heart with brass, instead of
gold, and with tin instead of silver, yet God will not be so put
off (Gal 6:7). You know how confident the foolish virgins were,
and yet how they were deceived. They herded with the saints, they
went forth from the gross pollutions of the world, they every
one had shining lamps, and all went forth to meet the bridegroom,
and yet they missed the kingdom; they were not written among the
living at Jerusalem; they had not the true, powerful, saving work
of conversion, of faith, and grace in their souls: they that are
foolish take their lamps, but take no oil, no saving grace, with
them (Matt 25:1-4). Thus you see how sinners will be put to it
before the judgment-seat from these two parts of this book of life.
But,

3. There is yet another part of this book to be opened, and that
is, that part of it in which are recorded those noble and Christian
acts, that they have done since the time of their conversion and
turning to Christ. Here, I say, are recorded the testimony of the
saints against sin and antichrist; their suffering for the sake
of God, their love to the members of Christ, their patience under
the cross, and their faithful frequenting the assemblies of the
saints, and their encouraging one another to bear up in his ways
in the worst of times; even when the proud were called happy, and
when they that wrought wickedness were even set up. As he there
saith, "Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another:
and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance
was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his name" (Mal 3:16).

For indeed, as truly as any person hath his name found in the first
part of this book of life, and his conversion in the second; so
there is a third part, in which there are his noble, spiritual, and
holy actions recorded and set down. As it is said by the Spirit
to John, concerning those that suffered martyrdom for the truth of
Jesus, "Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord:--Yea,
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their
works do follow them" (Rev 14:13).

And hence it is that the labours of the saints and the book of life,
are mentioned together, signifying that the travels, and labours,
and acts of the godly, are recorded therein (Phil 4:3).

And hence it is again, that the Lord doth tell Sardis, that those
among them that stood it out to the last gasp, in the faith and
love of the gospel, should not be blotted out of the book of life;
but they, with the work of God on their soul, and their labour
for God in this world; should be confessed before his Father, and
before his angels (Rev 3:5).

This part of this book, is in another place called, "The book
of the wars of the Lord," (Num 21:14), because in it, I say, are
recorded these famous acts of the saints against the world, flesh,
and the devil.

You find also, how exact the Holy Ghost is, in recording the travels,
pains, labour, and goodness of any of the children of Israel, in
their journey from Egypt to Canaan, which was a representation of
the travels of the saints, from nature to grace, and from grace
to glory. King Ahasuerus, kept in his library a book of records,
wherein was written, the good service that his subjects did for
him at any time, which was a type also of the manner and order of
heaven. And as sure as ever Mordecai, when search was made in the
rolls, was found there to have done such and such service for the
king and his kingdom (Esth 6:1,2): so surely will it be found, what
every saint hath done for God, at the day of inquiry. You find in
the Old Testament also, still as any of the kings of Judah died,
there was surely a record in the book of Chronicles, of their
memorable acts and doings for their God, the church, and the
commonwealth of Israel, which still doth further hold forth unto
the children of men, this very thing, that all the kings of the
New Testament, which are the saints of God, have all their acts,
and what they have done for their God, &c., recorded in the book
of Chronicles in the heavenly Jerusalem.

Now, I say, when this part of the book of life shall be opened,
what can be found in it, of the good deeds and heaven-born actions
of wicked men? Just nothing; for as it is not to be expected that
thorns should bring forth grapes, or that thistles should bear
figs: so it cannot be imagined, that ungodly men should have
anything to their commendations, recorded in this part of the book
of life. What hast thou done, man, for God in this world? Art thou
one of them that hast set thyself against those strong strugglings
of pride, lust, covetousness, and secret wickedness, that remain
in thy heart, like Job and Paul? (Job 1:8; 2 Cor 10:4,5). And do
these strugglings against these things, arise from pure love to
the Lord Jesus, or from some legal terrors and conviction for sin
(Gal 5:6). Dost thou, I say, struggle against thy lusts, because
thou dost in truth, love the sweet, holy, and blessed leadings of
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus; its leadings of thee, I say, into
his blood and death, for thy justification and deliverance from
wrath to come (Phil 3:6-8; 2 Cor 5:14).

What acts of self-denial, hast thou done for the name of the Lord
Jesus, among the sons of men? I say, what house, what friend, what
wife, what children, and the like, hast thou lost, or left for the
word of God, and the testimony of his truth in the world? (Matt
19:27,28; Rev 12:11). Wast thou one of them, that didst sigh, and
afflict thyself for the abominations of the times? and that Christ
hath marked and recorded for such an one? (Eze 9:4; Zeph 3:18).

In a word, art thou one of them, that wouldst not be won, neither
by fear, frowns, nor flatteries, to forsake the ways of God, or
wrong thy conscience? or art thou one of them that slightest those
opportunities that Satan and this world did often give thee to
return to sin in secret (Heb 11:15). These be the men whose praise
is in the gospel, and whose commendable and worthy acts are recorded
before the Judge of all the world. Alas, alas, these things are
strange things to a carnal and wicked man. Nothing of this hath
been done by him in this life, and therefore how can any such be
recorded for him in the book of life? wherefore he must needs be
shut out of this part also. As David saith, "Let them be blotted
out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous"
(Psa 69:28).

Thus I say, the wicked will find nothing for their comfort, either
in the first part of this book, where all the names of the elect
are, neither will they find anything in the second part thereof,
where are recorded the true nature and operation of effectual
conversion, of faith, or love, or the like; and I say, neither
can anything be found in this third part, wherein are recorded the
worthy acts, and memorable deeds of the saints of the Lord Jesus.
Thus, when Christ therefore hath opened before them this book of
life, and convinced the ungodly at this day out of it, he will
then shut it up again, saying, I find nothing herein that will do
you good; you are none of my elect, you are the sons of perdition.
For as these things will be found clear and full in the book of
life, so they will be found effectually wrought in the hearts
of the elect, all whose conversion and perseverance shall now be
opened before thine eyes, as a witness, I say, of the truth of what
thou here seest opened before thee, and also of thy unregenerate
estate. Now, thou wilt see what a turn, what a change, and what
a clinging to God, to Christ, and his word and ways; there was
found in the souls of the saved ones! Here shall be seen also how
resolvedly, unfeignedly, and heartily the true child of God did
oppose, resist, and war against his most dear and darling lusts
and corruptions. Now the saints are hidden ones, but then they
shall be manifest; this is the morrow in which the Lord will shew
who are his, and who they are that fear the Lord, and who that
fear him not (Psa 83:3; 1 Sam 8:19; Num 16:5; Mal 3:18). Now you
shall see how Abraham left his country (Heb 11:8); how close good
Lot did stick to God in profane and wicked Sodom (2 Peter 2:7,8);
how the apostles left all to follow Jesus Christ (Matt 19:29); and
how patiently they took all crosses, afflictions, persecutions,
and necessities for the kingdom of heaven's sake; how they endured
burning, striving, stoning, hanging, and a thousand calamities; how
they manifested their love to their Lord, his cause, and people in
the worst of times, and in the days when they were most rejected,
slighted, abused, and abased; "then shall the King say to them on
his right hand, (and that when all the devils and damned sinners
stand by,) Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world: (you are indeed
the truly converted souls, as appears by the grace that was in
your hearts) for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:
Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in
prison, and ye came unto me" (Matt 25:34-36). You owned me, stood
by me, and denied yourselves to nourish me and my poor members,
in our low, and weak, and most despised condition. This, I say,
the world shall see, hear, and be witnesses of, against themselves
and their souls for ever; for how can it be, but these poor damned
sinners should be forced to confess, that they were both Christless
and graceless, when they shall find, both in the book of life, and
in the hearts of the holy and beloved souls, that which themselves
are quite barren of, and greatest strangers to. The saints, by
the fruits of regeneration, even in this world, do testify to the
world, not only the truth of conversion in themselves, but also
that they are yet Christless, and so heavenless, and salvationless,
that are not converted (1 Tim 6:12; 1 Thess 2:10; 2 Tim 2:2). But
alas! while we are here, they will evade this testimony, both of
our happiness, by calling our faith, phantasy; our communion with
God, delusion; and the sincere profession of his word before the
world, hypocrisy, pride, and arrogancy: yet, I say, when they see
us on the right hand of Christ, commingled among the angels of
light, and themselves on his left hand, and commingled with the
angels of darkness; and, I say, when they shall see our hearts and
ways opened before their eyes, and owned by the Judge for honest
hearts and good ways, and yet the same ways that they hated,
slighted, disowned and contemned, what will they, or what can they
say, but thus--We fools counted their lives madness, and their end
to be without honour; but how are they numbered with the saints,
and owned by God and Christ!

And truly, was it not that the world might, by seeing the turn that
is wrought on the godly at their conversion, be convinced of the
evil of their ways, or be left without excuse the more in the day
of God, (with some other reasons) they should not, I am persuaded,
stay so long from heaven as they do, nor undergo so much abuse
and hardship as frequently befalls them. God, by the lengthening
out the life of his people that are scattered here and there
among men in this world, is making work for the day of judgment,
and the overthrow of the implacable, for ever and ever; and, as
I have said, will by the conversion, life, patience, self-denial,
and heavenly-mindedness of his dear children, give them a heavy
and most dreadful blow. Now, when God hath thus laid open the
work of grace, both by the book of life and the Christian's heart:
then, of itself will fall to the ground, their pleading what gifts
and abilities they had in this world; they will now see that gifts,
and grace, are two things: and also, that whosoever is graceless,
let their gifts be never so excellent, they must perish and be lost
for ever; wherefore, for all their gifts, they shall be found the
workers of iniquity, and shall so be judged and condemned (Matt
7:22,23). That is a notable place in the prophecy of Ezekiel, "Thus
saith he Lord GOD," saith he, "If the prince," the Prince of Life,
"give a gift to any of his sons,"--that is, to any that are truly
gracious--"the inheritance," or the profit that he gets thereby,
"shall be his son's"--that is, for the exercise of his gift he
shall receive a reward; "but if he give a gift of his inheritance
to one of his servants," that is not a son, "then it shall be
his" but "to the year of liberty; after, it shall return to the
prince," &c. (Eze 46:16,17). This day of liberty it is now, when
the Judge is set upon the throne to judgment, even the glorious
liberty of the children of God (Rom 8:21), wherefore then will
Christ say to them that stand by, "Take from him the pound, and
give it to him that hath ten pounds. This servant must not abide
in the house for ever, though with the son it shall be so" (John
8:35; Luke 19:24). A man may be used as a servant in the church of
God, and may receive many gifts, and much knowledge of the things
of heaven, and yet at last himself be no more than a very bubble
and nothing (1 Cor 13:1-3).

But now, I say, at this day, they shall clearly see the difference
between gifts and grace, even as clearly, as now they that have
eyes can see the difference between gifts and ignorance, and very
foolishness. This our day doth indeed abound with gifts; many
sparkling wits are seen in every corner; men have the word and
truths of Christ at their fingers' ends; but alas, with many,
yea, a great many, there is nought but wits and gifts; they are
but words, all their religion lieth in their tongues and heads,
the power of what they say and know, it is seen in others, not
in themselves. These are like the lord on whom the king of Israel
leaned, they shall see the plenty, the blessed plenty that God
doth provide, and will bestow upon his church, but they shall not
taste thereof (2 Kings 7:17-20).

Obs. First. Before I conclude this matter, observe, [first,] that
among all the objections and cavils that are made, and will be
made, by the ungodly, in the day of the Lord Jesus, they have not
one hump18 about election and reprobation; they murmur not at all
that they were not predestinated to eternal life; and the reason
is, because then they shall see, though now they are blind, that
God could in his prerogative royal, without prejudice to them that
are damned, choose and refuse at pleasure; and besides, they at
that day shall be convinced, that there was so much reality and
downright willingness in God, in every tender of grace and mercy
to the worst of men; and also so much goodness, justness, and
reasonableness in every command of the gospel of grace, which they
were so often entreated and beseeched to embrace, that they will
be drowned in the conviction of this, that did refuse love, grace,
reason, &c.: love, I say, for hatred, grace for sin, and things
reasonable, for things unreasonable and vain. Now they shall see
they left glory for shame, God for the devil, heaven for hell, light
for darkness. Now they shall see that though they made themselves
beasts, yet God made them reasonable creatures, and that he
did with reason expect that they should have adhered to, and have
delighted in, things that are good, and according to God; yea, now
they shall see, that though God did not determine to bring them to
heaven against their hearts and wills, and the love that they had
to their sins: yet then they shall be convinced, that God was far
from infusing anything into their souls, that should in the least
hinder, weaken, obstruct, or let them in seeking the welfare of
their souls. Now men will tattle and prattle at a mad rate, about
election and reprobation, and conclude, that because all are not
elected, therefore God is to blame that any are damned: but then
they will see, that they are not damned because they were not
elected, but because they sinned; and also that they sinned, not
because God put any weakness into their souls, but because they
gave way, and that willfully, knowingly, and desperately, to Satan
and his suggestions; and so turned away from the holy commandment
delivered unto them; yea, then they will see, that though God at
some times did fasten his cords about their heads, and heels, and
hands, both by godly education, and smarting convictions, yet they
rushed away with violence from all, saying, "Let us break their
bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us" (Psa 2:3). God
will be justified in his sayings, and clear when he judgeth (Psa
51:4), though thy proud ignorance thinks to have, and to multiply,
cavils against him.

Obs. Second. But secondly, as the whole body of the elect, by the
nature of conversion in their hearts, shall witness a non-conversion
in the hearts of the wicked; and as the ungodly shall fall under
the conviction of this cloud of witnesses: so, to increase their
conviction, there will also be opened before them all the labours
of the godly, both ministers and others, and the pains that they
have taken, to save, if it had been possible, these damned wretches;
and now will it come burning hot upon their souls, how often they
were forewarned of this day; now they shall see, that there was
never any quarter-sessions, nor general jail-delivery more publicly
foretold of, than this day. You know that the judges before they
begin their assizes, do give to the country in charge, that they
take heed to the laws and statutes of the king. Why rebel, thou
shalt be at this day convicted, that every sermon thou hast heard,
and that every serious debate thou hast been at about the things
of God, and laws of eternity, they were to thee as the judge's
charge before the assizes and judgment began. Every exhortation of
every minister of God, it is as that which Paul gave to Timothy,
and commanded him to give in charge to others--"I charge thee before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels," saith he,
"that thou observe these things;" and again, "I give thee charge
in the sight of God, who quickeneth all things, and before Jesus
Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession;
That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ" (1 Tim 5:21; 6:13,14). These
things give in charge, saith he, that they may be blameless. This,
I say, hast thou heard and seen, and yet thou hast not held fast,
but hast cast away the things that thou hast heard, and hast been
warned of: alas! God will multiply his witnesses against thee.

1. Thy own vows and promises shall be a witness against thee, that
thou hast, contrary to thy light and knowledge, destroyed thy soul,
as Joshua said to the children of Israel, when they said the Lord
should be their God. Well, saith he, "Ye are witnesses against
yourselves that ye have chosen you the Lord, to serve him." That
is, if now you turn back again, even this covenant and resolution
of yours will in the great day be a witness against you--"And they
said, We are witnesses" (Josh 24:22).

2. Every time you have with your mouth said well of godliness, and
yet gone on in wickedness; or every time you have condemned sin
in others, and yet have not refrained it yourselves; I say, every
such word and conclusion that hath passed out of thy mouth, sinner,
it shall be as a witness against thee in the day of God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ; as Christ saith, "By thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned" (Matt 12:37).
I observe, that talk with who you will, they will with their mouth
say, serving of God, and loving of Christ, and walking in ways of
holiness, are best, and best will come of them. I observe again,
that men that are grossly wicked themselves, will yet, with heavy
censures and judgments, condemn drunkenness, lying, covetousness,
pride, and whoring, with all manner of abominations in others;
and yet, in the meantime, continue to be neglecters of God, and
embracers of sin and the allurements of the flesh themselves. Why,
such souls, every time they speak well of godliness, and continue
in their sins; they do pass judgment upon themselves, and provide
a witness, even their own mouth, against their own soul, at the
judgment-seat--"Out of thy own mouth," saith Christ, "will I judge
thee, thou wicked servant;" thou knewest what I was, and that
I loved to see all my servants zealous, and active for me, that
at my coming, I might have received again what I gave thee, with
increase; thou oughtest therefore to have been busying thyself in
my work, for my glory, and thy own good; but seeing thou hast,
against thy own light and mouth gone contrary: Angels, take this
unprofitable servant, and cast ye him into utter darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; he sinned against his
light, he shall go to hell against his will (Matt 25:26-31).

The very same I say, will befall all those that have used their
mouth to condemn the sins of others, while they themselves live
in their sins. Saith God, O thou wicked wretch, thou didst know
that sin was bad, thou didst condemn it in others, thou dist also
condemn, and pass judgment upon them for their sin, "Therefore
thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for"
thou that judgest dost the same thing; wherefore, "wherein thou
hast judged another, thou condemnest thyself." I must therefore,
saith Christ, look upon thee to be no other but a sinner against
thy own mouth, and cannot but judge thee as a despiser of my
goodness, and the riches of my forbearance; by which means, thou
hast treasured up wrath against this day of wrath, and revelation
of the righteous judgment of God (Rom 2:1-5). He that knoweth to
do good, and doth it not, to him it is sin. Thus will God, I say,
judge and condemn poor sinners, even from and by themselves, to
the fire, that lake of brimstone and fire.

3. God hath said in his word, that rather than there shall want
witness at the day of judgment, against the workers of iniquity:
the very dust of their city, that shall cleave to his messengers
that publish the gospel shall itself be a witness against them;
and so Christ bid his servants say--"Into whatsoever city ye enter,
and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the
same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on
us, we do wipe off against you": &c. "But I say unto you," saith
he to his ministers, "it shall be more tolerable for Sodom" at
the judgment "than for that city" (Luke 10:10-12).

It may be, that when thou hearest that the dust of the street,
(that cleaveth to a minister of the gospel, while thou rejectest
his word of salvation,) shall be a witness against thee at the
day of judgment: thou wilt be apt to laugh, and say, The dust a
witness! Witnesses will be scarce where dust is forced to come in
to plead against a man. Well sinner, mock not; God doth use to
confound the great and mighty by things that are not, and that
are despised. And how sayest thou? If God had said by a prophet
to Pharaoh, but two years before the plague, that he would shortly
come against him with one army of lice, and a second army of
frogs, and with a third army of locusts, &c., and would destroy
his land, dost thou think it had been wisdom in Pharaoh, now to
have laughed such tidings to scorn? "Is anything too hard for the
Lord? Hath he said it, and shall he not bring it to pass?" You
shall see in the day of judgment, of what force all these things
will be, as witnesses against the ungodly.

Many more witnesses might I here reckon up, but these at this time
shall suffice to be nominated; for out of the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word shall be established (2 Cor 13:1). "And at
the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of
death, be put to death" (Deu 17:6; John 8:17).

[Fourth--the sentence of the ungodly.] Thus then, the books being
opened, the laws read, the witnesses heard, and the ungodly
convicted; forthwith the Lord and Judge proceeds to execution.

[THE SENTENCE AND PUNISHMENT OF THE WICKED.]

And to that end doth pass the sentence of eternal death upon them,
saying, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels" (Matt 25:41). You are now by the
book of the creatures, by the book of God's remembrance, by the
book of the law, and by the book of life, adjudged guilty of high
treason against God and me; and as murderers of your own souls,
as these faithful and true witnesses here have testified, every
one of them appearing in their most upright testimony against
you. Also, you never had a saving work of conversion, and faith,
passed upon you, you died in your sins; neither can I find anything
in the last part of this book that will serve your turn, no worthy
act is here recorded of you--When "I was an hungered, and ye gave
me no meat": when "I was thirsty, ye game me no drink: when I was
a stranger, ye took me not in: I was naked, but ye clothed me not:
I was sick and in prison, but ye visited me not": I have made a
thorough search among the records of the living, and find nothing
of you, or of your deeds, therein--"Depart from me, ye cursed,"
&c. (Matt 25:42,43).

Thus will these poor ungodly creatures be stripped of all hope
and comfort, and therefore must need fall into great sadness and
wailing, before the Judge; yea, crying out, as being loath to
let go all for lost; and even as the man that is fallen into the
river, will catch hold of anything when he is struggling for life,
though it tend to hold him faster under the water to drown him:
so, I say, while these poor creatures, as they lie struggling and
twining under the ireful countenance of the Judge; they will bring
out yet one more faint and weak groan, and there goes life and
all; their last sigh is this--Lord, when saw we thee an hungered,
and gave thee no meat: or when saw we thee thirsty, and gave thee
no drink? when saw we thee a stranger, and took thee not in? or
naked, and clothed thee not? or when wast thou sick, or in prison,
and we did not minister unto thee? (Matt 25:44).

Thus you see, how loath the sinner is now to take a "nay" of life
everlasting. He that once would not be persuaded to close with the
Lord Jesus, though one should have persuaded him with tears of
blood: behold how fast he now hangs about the Lord, what arguments
he frames with mournful groans; how with shifts and words he seeks
to gain the time, and to defer the execution: Lord, open unto us!
Lord, Lord, open unto us! (Matt 25:11). Lord, thou hast taught in
our streets, and we have both taught in thy name and in thy name
have we cast out devils (Matt 7:22). We have eaten and drank in
thy presence (Luke 13:26). And when did we see thee an hungry, or
thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister to thee? (Matt 25:10,11). O poor hearts! how loath,
how unwillingly do they turn away from Christ! How loath are they
to partake of the fruit of their ungodly doings! Christ must say,
Depart once, and depart twice, before they will depart. When he
hath shut the door upon them, yet they knock, and cry, "Lord, open
unto us;" when he hath given them their answer, "that he knows
them not," yet they plead and mourn. Wherefore he is fain to answer
again, "I tell you, I know you not whence you are; depart" (Luke
13:25-27).

"DEPART." O this word, Depart! How dreadful is it! with what weight
will it fall on the head of every condemned sinner! For you must
note, that while the ungodly stand thus before the Judge; they
cannot choose but have a most famous view both of the kingdom of
heaven, and of the damned wights in hell. Now they see the God of
glory, the King of glory, the saints of glory, and the angels of
glory; and the kingdom in which they have their eternal abode. Now,
they also begin to see the worth of Christ, and what it is to be
smiled upon by him; from all which they must depart; and as I say,
they shall have the view of this; so they will most famously19
behold the pit, the bottomless pit, the fire, the brimstone, and
the flaming beds that justice hath prepared for them of old (Jude
4). Their associates also, will be very conspicuous, and clear
before their watery eyes. They will see now, what and which are
devils, and who are damned souls; now their great-grandfather
Cain, and all his brood, with Judas and his companions, must be
their fellow-sighers in the flames and pangs for ever. O heavy
day! O heavy word!

This word "depart," therefore, it looketh two ways, and commands
the damned to do so too. Depart from heaven, depart to hell; depart
from life, depart to death: "depart from me"--now the ladder doth
turn from under them indeed.20

The Saviour turns them off, the Saviour throws them down. He hath
given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the
Son of man (John 5:27). Depart from me: I would come to have done
you good; but then you would not. Now then, though you would have
it never so willingly, yet you shall not.

"Depart from me, ye cursed." You lie open to the stroke of justice
for your sins; ye forsaken, and left of God, ye vessels of wrath,
ye despisers of God and goodness, you must now have vengeance feed
on you; for you did, when you were in the world, feed on sin, and
treasure up wrath against this day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God (Rom 2:3-6).

"Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire." Fire is that which of
all things is the most insufferable and insupportable. Wherefore,
by fire, is shewed the grievous state of the ungodly, after
judgment. Who can eat fire, drink fire, and lie down in the midst
of flames of fire? Yet this must the wicked do. Again; not only
fire, but everlasting fire. "Behold how great a fire a little
matter kindleth." A little sin, a little pleasure, a little unjust
dealing and doing; what preparation is made for the punishment
thereof. And hence it is, that the fire into which the damned fall,
is called the lake, or sea of fire--"And whosoever," saith John,
"was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake
of fire and brimstone" (Rev 20:15). Little did the sinner seriously
think, that when he was sinning against God, he was making such
provision for his poor soul; but now 'tis too late to repent, his
worm must never die, and his fire never shall be quenched (Mark
9:48). Though the time in which men commit sin is short, yet the
time of God's punishing of them for their sin, is long.

"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels." In that he saith, "prepared for the devil
and his angels": he insinuates a further conviction upon the
consciences of the damned. As if he had said, As for this fire
and lake that you must go to, though you thought but little of
it, because you were careless, yet I did betimes put you in mind
of what would be the fruits of sin; even by preparing of this
judgment for the devil and his angels. The devil in his creation
is far more noble than you; yet when he sinned, I spared him not.
He sinned also before man; and I, upon his sinning, did cast him
down from heaven to hell, and did hang the chains of everlasting
darkness upon him (Jude 6), which might, yea, ought to have been
a fair item to you to take heed, but you would not (Gen 3:2-5).
Wherefore, seeing you have sinned as he hath done, and that too,
after he had both sinned, and was bound over to eternal punishment;
the same justice that layeth hold on these more noble creatures,
must surely seize on you (Rev 20:1). The world should be convinced of
judgment then, "because the prince of this world is judged" (John
16:8). And that before they came to this condition of hearing the
eternal sentence rattle in their ears; but seeing they did not
regard it then, they must and shall feel the smart of it now.
"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels."

God would have men learn both what mercy and justice is to them,
by his shewing it to others; but if they be sottish and careless
in the day of forbearance, they must learn by smarting in the day
of rebukes and vengeance. Thus it was with the old world; God gave
them one hundred and twenty years' warning, by the preparation of
Noah, for the flood that should come; but forasmuch as they then
were careless, and would not consider the works of the Lord, nor
his threatening them by this preparation: therefore he brought in
the flood upon the world of the ungodly, as he doth here the last
judgment upon the workers of iniquity, and sweeps them all away
in their willful ignorance (Matt 24:37-39).

Wherefore, I say, the Lord Chief Judge by these words, "Prepared
for the devil and his angels," doth as good as say, This fire into
which now I send you, it did of itself, even in the preparation of
it, had you considered it, forewarn you of this that now is come
upon you. Hell-fire is no new, or unheard-of thing; you cannot now
plead, that you heard not of it in the world, neither could you
with any reason judge, that seeing I prepared it for angels, for
noble, powerful, and mighty angels; that you, poor dust and ashes,
should escape the vengeance.

"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels": The sentence being thus passed, it remains
now, the work being done, that every one goeth to his eternal
station. Wherefore, forthwith this mighty company, do now with
heavy heart, return again from before the judgment-seat: and that
full hastily, God knoweth, for their proper centre, is the hell
of hell; into which they descend like a stone into a well, or like
Pharaoh into the bottom of the Red Sea (Exo 15:10). For all hope
being now taken from them, they must needs fall with violence, into
the jaws of eternal desperation, which will deal far worse with
the souls of men, and make a greater slaughter in their tortured
consciences, than the lions in the den with Daniel, could possibly
do with the men that were cast in among them (Dan 6:24).

This is that which Paul calleth eternal judgment (Heb 6:2), because
it is that which is last and final. Many are the judgments that
God doth execute among the sons of men, some after this manner,
and some after that; divers of which, continue but for awhile, and
none of them are eternal; no, the very devils and damned spirits
in hell, though there, is the longest and most terrible of all
the judgments of God, yet on foot: yet I say, they must pass under
another judgment, even this last, great, and final judgment--"The
angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness,
unto the judgment of the great day" (Jude 6). And so also it is
with damned souls; for both Sodom and Gomorrah, with all other,
though already in hell in their souls; yet they must, as I have
before shewed, all arise to this judgment, which will be their final
judgment. Other of the judgments of God, as they have an end, so
the end of many of them prove the profit of those on whom they are
inflicted, being I say, God's instrument of conversion to sinners;
and so may fitly be compared to those petty judgments among men,
as putting in the stocks, whipping, or burning in the hand: which
punishments, and judgments, do often prove profitable to those that
are punished with them; but eternal judgment, it is like those
more severe judgments among men, as beheading, shooting to death,
hanging, drawing and quartering, which swoop21 all, even health,
time, and the like, and cut off all opportunity of good, leaving no
place for mercy or amendment--"These shall go away into everlasting
punishment," &c. (Matt 25:46). This word, "depart," &c., is the
last word the damned for ever are like to hear--I say, it is the
last voice, and therefore will stick longest, and with most power,
on their slaughtered souls; there is no calling of it back again;
it is the very wind-up of eternal judgment.

Thus then, the judgment being over, the kingdom ceaseth to be any
longer in the hand of the man Christ Jesus; for as the judges here
among men, when they have gone their circuit, do deliver up their
commission to the king; so Christ the judge, doth now deliver up
his kingdom to his Father (Matt 21:8), and now, all is swallowed
up of eternity. The damned are swallowed up of eternal justice and
wrath; the saved, of eternal life and felicity; and the Son also
delivereth up, I say, the kingdom to the Father, and subjects
himself under him that did put all things under him, that God may
be all in all (1 Cor 15:24-28).

For now is the end come, and not before, even the end of the reign
of death itself; for death, and hell, and sinners, and devils,
must now [fall] together into the lake, that burns with fire and
brimstone (Rev 20:14,15). And now is the end of Christ's reign, as
the Son of man; and the end of the reign of the saints with him,
in this his kingdom, which he hath received of his Father for his
work sake, which he did for him, and for his elect. "Then cometh
the end," saith Paul, "when he shall have delivered up the kingdom
to God, even the Father;" But when shall that be? Why, he answers
saying, "When he shall have put down all rule and all authority
and power. For he must reign," saith he, "till he hath put all
enemies under his feet," which will not be until the final sentences
and judgment be over; for "the last enemy that shall be destroyed
is death. For he (God) hath put all things under his feet. But
when he saith, All things are put under him, it is manifest that
he is excepted which did put all things under him. And when all
things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself
be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may
be all in all" (1 Cor 15:24-28).

All things being now at this pass--to wit, every one being in its
proper place, God in his, Christ in his, the saint in his, and the
sinner in his; I shall conclude with this brief touch upon both
the state of the good and bad after this eternal judgment--

The righteous now shall never fear death, the devil, and hell more;
and the wicked shall never hope of life.

The just shall ever have the victory over these things: but the
wicked shall everlastingly be swallowed up of them.

The holy shall be in everlasting light: but the sinner in everlasting
darkness. Without light, I say, yet in fire ever burning, yet not
consumed; always afraid of death and hell, vehemently desiring to be
annihilated to nothing. Continually fearing to stay long in hell,
and yet certainly sure they shall never come out of it. Ever
desiring the saints' happiness, and yet always envying their
felicity. They would have it, because it is easy and comfortable;
yet cannot abide to think of it, because they have lost it for ever.
Ever laden with the delight of sin; and yet that is the greatest
torture; always desiring to put it out of their mind, and yet
assuredly know they must for ever abide the guilt and torment
thereof.

The saints are always inflamed with the consideration of the grace
that once they embraced; but the wicked, most flamingly tormented
with the thoughts of rejecting and refusing it.

The just, when they think of their sins, they are comforted with
the thoughts of their being delivered from them; but the ungodly,
when they think of their righteousness, will gnaw themselves, to
think that this would not deliver them from hell.

When the godly think of hell, it will increase their comfort; but
when the wicked think of heaven, it will twinge them like a serpent.
Oh, this eternal judgment! What would a damned soul give that
there might be, though after thousands and hundreds of thousands
of millions of years, an end put to this eternal judgment. But
their misery is, they have sinned against a God that is eternal;
they have offended that justice that will never be satisfied; and
therefore they must abide the fire that never shall be quenched.
Here is judgment, just and sad.

Again; as it will be thus with good and bad in general, so again,
more particularly, when the wicked are thus adjudged and condemned,
and also received of the fiery gulf, then they shall find, That
as he that busieth himself to do good, shall have more glory than
others; so they that have been more busy and active in sin than
others, they shall have more wrath and torment than others. For
as doing good abundantly, doth enlarge the heart to receive and
hold more glory: so doing evil abundantly, doth enlarge the heart
and soul to receive punishment so much the more. And hence it is
that you have such sayings as these--It shall be more tolerable
in the judgment for Sodom than for others (Luke 10:12)--that is,
than for those that had sinned against much greater light and
mercy. "For these," as he saith in another place, "shall receive
greater damnation" (Luke 20:47). Yea, it standeth to reason, that
he who had most light, most conviction, most means of conversion,
and that was highest towards heaven, he must needs have the greatest
fall, and so sink deepest into the jaws of eternal misery. As one
star--that is, as one saint--differeth from another in heaven; so
one damned soul shall differ from another in hell. It is so among
the devils themselves; they are some worse than others; Beelzebub
is the prince, or chief of the devils (Matt 9:34; Mark 3:22).
That is, one that was most glorious in heaven; chief among the
reprobate angels before his fall (Isa 14:12), and therefore sinned
against the greater light, mercy, and goodness; and so became the
chief for wickedness, and will also have as the wages thereof, the
chief of torments. For that will be true of the damned in hell,
which is prayed for against Babylon.--"How much she hath glorified
herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give
her" (Rev 18:7). Can it be imagined that Judas should have no more
torment, who betrayed the Prince of life and Saviour of the world,
than others who never came near his wickedness by ten thousand
degrees? He that knew his master's will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes; with many more stripes, than others that through ignorance
did commit sin worthy of many stripes. But what should I thus
discourse of the degrees of the torments of the damned souls in
hell? For he that suffers least, will the waters of a full cup be
wrung out to him; the least measure of wrath, it will be the wrath
of God, eternal and fiery wrath, insupportable wrath; it will lay
the soul in the gulf of that second death, which will for ever have
the mastery over the poor damned perishing sinner. "And death and
hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death.
And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast
into the lake of fire" (Rev 20:14,15).


FOOTNOTES:

1 Bunyan quotes this from the Genevan or Puritan version; our
present translation has "in our body."--Ed.

2 From the verb "to chit," to sprout--to shoot at the end of the
grain; provincial and almost obsolete.--Ed.

3 These ideas are as new as they are striking and splendid. Our
vile bodies, when raised from the dust, shall be spiritual--like
that of Christ--with him in glory; "bright as the sun and stars
and angels." How amazingly superior is our preaching mechanic,
to all the fathers (so called) and dignitaries of state churches
that ever wrote upon this subject. Bunyan proves his apostolic
descent in the right line; he breathes the spirit--the holy fire
of the inspired writers.--Ed.

4 I have continued this word as Bunyan spelt it, but he probably
meant hog-herd, a keeper or driver of swine, one of the dirtiest
and lowest employments.

"No boorish hog-herd fed his rooting swine" Browne's Pastorals.--Ed.

5 "Its possessing of us," or to give us possession. "This possesses
us of the most valuable blessing of human life, friendship." Gov.
of Tongue.--Ed.

6 This is an awful state of delusion; to imagine that God is the
author of gross things, such as worshipping a wafer, or applying
to a priest to forgive sins; and that a holy God prompts them to
the doing thereof, and sanctions them by his presence!! "Every man
is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed,"
James 1:14. Christian, take care that you receive not any doctrine,
nor conform to any practice in religion, without prayerful
investigation, and a "thus saith the Lord" for its sanction.--Ed.

7 "Go to his grave in his banner," alluding to splendid funerals,
the hearse being ornamented with banners captured in war, or
armorial bearings.--Ed.

8 Unsanctified knowledge, accompanied by a degree of conformity in
conduct, may be the portion of some who indulge soul-destroying
heresies.--Ed.

9 A graphic writer, addressing us at the distance of two centuries,
frequently makes interesting mention of manners and customs prevailing
at the time wherein he lived. From the illustration here employed
by Bunyan, we learn that the culprit before trial, and therefore
before convicted of crime, was in a manner prejudged, and loaded
with fetters. These extreme judicial severities belong to the past.

10 "Abundance," exuberance, more than enough.--Ed.

11 Bunyan's sanctified mind, well stored with the sacred scriptures,
richly enjoyed the contemplation of nature. No writer, however
blessed with extensive learning, sanctified by deep and glowing
piety, has opened the book of creation with such a master mind, as
a witness against man at the day of judgment. In this, as in many
other things, Bunyan stands pre-eminent; a striking illustration
of the ways of God, who poured such abundance of heavenly treasure
into an earthen vessel, despised and persecuted of men.--Ed.

12 "Slethy," now obsolete, sly, cunning, stealthy. "Darkened with
men's sleightie jugling, and counterfeit crafts." Bishop Gardiner.--Ed.

13 "Twenty and twenty years," a singular mode of expression,
probably alluding to the forty years' trial of the Israelites in
the wilderness.--Ed.

14 Conscience, at the day of judgment, will imperatively "command
guilt," which had been committed, to appear, and will fasten it
upon the soul, which it accuseth. This is a most impressive and
solemn appeal;--there can then be no concealment, no subterfuge.--Ed.

15 "Pricked," nominated by a puncture or mark, as our sheriffs are
pricked.--Ed.

16 "Counters," false coin--"Will you with counters sum The vast
proportion of his infinite." Shakespeare.--Ed.

17 "Keser," Caesar or emperor.--Ed.


18 "Hump;" or "hump-back" is a deformity in nature, so Bunyan uses
the word "hump" as a deformity in judgment.--Ed.

19 "Famously," plainly, openly; in this sense obsolete. Tillotson
used the words "famous malefactors." Sermon on 1 John 4:9.--Ed.

20 Bunyan here alludes to men convicted of crime; but how many
innocent, nay, pious servants of Christ, have been compelled to go
up the ladder to the gibbet, and when the rope has been adjusted
and the ladder turned, have been ignominiously murdered by the
sanction of wicked laws.--Ed.

21 The physician looks with another eye on the medicinal herb than the
grazing ox, which swoops it in with the common grass. Glanville.--Ed.

***

SOME GOSPEL TRUTHS OPENED, ACCORDING TO THE SCRIPTURES; OR, THE
DIVINE AND HUMAN NATURE OF CHRIST JESUS;

HIS COMING INTO THE WORLD; HIS RIGHTEOUSNESS, DEATH, RESURRECTION,
ASCENSION, INTERCESSION, AND SECOND COMING TO JUDGMENT, PLAINLY
DEMONSTRATED AND PROVED.

AND ALSO,

Answers to several Questions, with profitable Directions to stand
fast in the Doctrine of Jesus the Son of MARY, against those
blustering Storms of the Devil's Temptations, which do at this
Day, like so many Scorpions, break loose from the bottomless Pit,
to bite and torment those that have not tasted the Vertue of Jesus,
by the Revelation of the Spirit of God.

Published for the good of God's chosen ones, by that unworthy
servant of CHRIST, JOHN BUNYAN, of BEDFORD, By the grace of GOD,
preacher of the GOSPEL of his dear SON.

'Jesus saith,--I am the way, and the truth and the life: no man
cometh unto the Father but by me.'--John 14:6

'Neither is there salvation in any other.'--Acts 4:12


EDITOR'S ADVERTISEMENT.

This was the first work published by the indefatigable servant of
Christ, John Bunyan; and he modestly sought the patronage of his
brethren in the ministry, and Messrs. Burton, Spencly and Child
wrote prefatory recommendations. The latter of these, Mr. John
Child, for some temporal advantages afterwards conformed; and
became notorious for having, in a fit of despair, destroyed himself.

Well might Bunyan in this treatise, call the early period of his
ministry 'distracted and dangerous times,' in which many a poor
sincere inquirer stood 'tottering and shaking,' bewildered with the
new din of sectaries, each boldly declaring his divine authority.
In the midst of this storm of contending opinions, Bunyan stood
forth conspicuously to declare 'Gospel Truths'; and to open and
vindicate them these discourses were written. To enable the reader
to understand and appreciate them, it will be needful to take a
rapid glance at the state of society which then prevailed. The
frivolities of dress and laxity of morals introduced by James
the First, increased by the mixture of French fashions under the
popish wife of Charles the First, had spread their debauching
influence throughout the kingdom. George Fox, the founder of the
Society of Friends, in an address 'To such as follow the world's
fashions,' gives an almost incredible description of the tomfooleries
of dress which prevailed. 'How doth the devil garnish himself,
and the people are carried away with vanity--women plaiting their
hair--men and women powdering it, making their backs like bags
of meal. The men having store of ribbands of divers colours about
their waists, and at their knees, and in their hats. The women with
their spots on their noses, cheeks, and foreheads--rings on their
fingers--cuffs double, like a butcher in his white sleeves--ribbands
about their arms, hands, back, waists, knees--and hats like unto
fidlers' bags--is not this the devil's adorning?'[1]

At this period the iron hand of tyranny and oppression over the
worship of God had been suddenly paralyzed. The ruinous penalties,
and even capital punishments, which had enforced attendance on a
form of common prayer, and a pretence to believe articles, creeds,
and catechisms, ordained by Acts of Parliament, were removed.
Man, by nature averse to religious inquiries, was now stimulated,
under a threat of eternal ruin, personally and individually, to
seek for truth and salvation. At this time a little persecuted
band of puritans had directed every inquirer after salvation to
the sacred Scriptures, which alone were able to make wise unto
salvation, by the aid of the Holy Spirit enlightening their minds
to understand, and subduing their wills to receive those eternal
truths. But a new light was now discovered--that which lighteneth
every man that cometh into the world; and which, it was alleged,
would alone, if cherished and followed, lead the honest inquirer
into all truth. National religion, so called, had been propagated
at an incredible expense of treasure, and by the sacrifice of the
best blood in the country, to the shrine of infallibility--called
uniformity. A hireling priesthood had limited to themselves the
right to teach men how to be Christians. The result of all this
was clearly seen, when the people were driven to think and choose
for themselves. Their minds were in darkness and confusion,
which quickly produced the most whimsical, mischievous, and even
ludicrous opinions, mixed with truth.

National establishments, whether Pagan, Mohamedan, or Christian--be
this latter either Greek, Roman, or Protestant--have a direct and
natural tendency to repress and prevent personal inquiries, lest
they should interfere with uniformity in faith and worship; which is
a presumed incapability of error on the part of those who impose
them. Systems, which IN FACT, although not in words, claim
infallibility, by requiring implicit and absolute submission, must
have had a direct tendency to hoodwink and blind the people; nor
can we be surprised, that when their eyes were first opened, they
saw indistinctly; or, to use a scripture phrase, 'men as trees
walking.' They utterly failed in preparing the mind to receive divine
truth, or in furnishing an antidote to extravagant speculations
in religion.

The state of the millions can hardly be conceived; they had paid
a priest to think on religion for them--to read the Bible for
them--and to pray for them. They had paid the church to make them
Christians--to confirm them--to forgive their sins--and to bury
their bodies in sure and certain hope of heaven. From this fatal
sleep of ignorance and error, they were aroused by itinerant
preachers; many of whom were men of education, of irreproachable
morals, and most benevolent habits. They went forth upon their
mission at a fearful sacrifice of comfort, property, health, and
even of life; calling all to repentance, and to obey the light
within--to follow on to perfection in this life--and, at the
same time, denouncing all hireling ministers. They were called
in derision, Familists, Ranters, Quakers, New Lights, &c. The
old leaven, which had led the people without inquiry to follow
the priests, now operated on multitudes to follow those ardent
and self-denying leaders. The Familists, or family of love, were
consistent in their lives;--considered every day a sabbath, and
baptized none under thirty years of age. The Ranters mingled a
little truth with much error--abused their Christian liberty--and
lived licentiously, and were a scandal to religion. The Quakers--so
called from their trembling agitation when under a powerful sense
of eternal realities, and because, in preaching, they admonished
their hearers to tremble and quake at the word of God--considered
the sacraments as mere ceremonies, inconsistent with spiritual
worship--lived and dressed with the utmost simplicity, and took
the lead in attacking error at all risks.

These itinerants went through the whole length and breadth of the
land, and in every place of public resort they made proclamation.
In fairs, markets, meetings, assizes, and steeple-houses, their
voice was heard denouncing evil and exhorting to righteousness.
Short weights and deceit were declared an abomination to the
Lord, in fairs and markets. Every religious delusion was exposed
in meetings and parish churches. The journals of George Fox, and
others, are exceedingly interesting in recounting their hazardous
adventures, zeal, and no ordinary degree of ready wit and talent.
Some of these itinerants came to Bedford, and in the parish church,
called 'the steeple-house,' in Bedford town, on the 23d of May,
1656, they met John Bunyan, probably after he had been ministering
there. With him they held a public disputation or controversy, to
which allusions are made by both parties,[2] and in Bunyan they
met a master spirit who confounded them. The subjects in dispute
were of the deepest importance--the work of the Holy Spirit in
conversion--the authority of the Bible--the perfection of holiness
in this life--and whether it was lawful to perform the work of
the ministry for hire.

After a very careful perusal of E. Burrough's answers to Bunyan,
it is gratifying to find that the whole truth is set forth in
the following pages;--some of the facts are worthy of a careful
notice. The Baptists and Independents had long existed in this
country, and had published confessions of faith. The Ranters and
Familists existed not as sects but in name, and soon disappeared.
The Quakers, who were confounded with the Ranters and Familists,
were not at this time formed into a society; nor had they published
any book of discipline. The Society of Friends were some years
after united, and have been one of the most useful as well as
the brightest ornaments to this kingdom. The works of Fox, Penn,
Barclay, and others, with their books of discipline, and yearly
epistles, shew that they, to a very great extent, agree with Bunyan
in his sentiments; and it is well worthy of notice that, in the
latter part of his life, when he wrote his admirable treatise
on the resurrection of the dead, he does not accuse the Society
of Friends with holding any false opinions. Bunyan is clear and
scriptural upon the 'Light within,' or that conscience of right
and wrong which all possess to their condemnation--as distinguished
from the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, the gift of God to his
people, revealing in them the pardon of sin and hope of glory, by
opening their understandings to receive the truths of the Bible.
When Ann Blakeley bid Bunyan 'throw away the Scriptures,' he
replied, 'No, for then the devil would be too hard for me.'[3] And
when accused of being a hireling priest, how triumphant was the
reply--it ought to be printed in letters of gold. He was charged
with making merchandize of souls, and he answered--'Friend, dost
thou speak this from thy own knowledge, or did any other tell thee
so? However, that spirit that led thee out this way is a lying
spirit. For though I be poor, and of no repute in the world, as
to outward things; yet through grace I have learned by the example
of the apostle, to preach the truth; and also to work with my
hands, both for my own living, and for those that are with me,
when I have opportunity. And I trust that the Lord Jesus, who hath
helped me to reject the wages of unrighteousness hitherto, will
also help me still, so that I shall distribute that which God hath
given me FREELY, and not for filthy lucre's sake.'[4] How does
this contrast with the description of the state clergy, before
the triers were appointed.[5]

Favoured by the kind assistance of Charles Bowden, the secretary
to the Society of Friends, access was afforded me to the extensive
library in Devonshire House, and upon collation of Bunyan's
quotations with the original editions of Burrough's exceedingly
rare tracts, my gratification was great to find that every extract
made by John Bunyan was perfectly faithful.

Edward Burrough, called a son of thunder and of consolation,
answered both these treatises of Bunyan's,--denying, on the part
of the Quakers, many of the charges made against them, as connected
with the Ranters. He was a man of great talent--fearless, devoted,
and pious. He became extensively useful; and like thousands of
most excellent men, was sacrificed at the shrine of that fanatical
church over which the profligate and debauched Charles the Second
was the supreme head. He died in the prime of life, receiving the
crown of martyrdom, when his happy spirit ascended from Newgate
in 1662: aged 28 years.

No sect was so severely tormented as the Quakers. A fanatical
clergyman, Edward Lane, in a book called 'Look unto Jesus,' 1663,
thus pours forth his soul, breathing out cruelty--'I hope and pray
the Lord to incline the heart of his majesty our religious King,
to suppress the Quakers, that none of them may be suffered to abide
in the land.' A prayer as full of cruelty against a most peaceful
and valuable part of the community, as it was hypocritical in
calling a debauched and profligate man [Charles the Second] 'our
religious king.'

Controversy was carried on in those days with extreme virulence;
learned and unlettered men alike used violent language, which, in
this enlightened and comparatively happy age, is read with wonder.
Burrough called his answer 'The Gospel of Peace contended for in
the spirit of meekness and of love.' He meekly commences with--'How
long, ye crafty fowlers, will ye prey upon the innocent; how long
shall the righteous be a prey to your teeth, ye subtle foxes; your
dens are in darkness, and your mischief is hatched upon your beds
of secret whoredoms.' He says, 'I own the words but I deny thy
voice.' Such was the unhallowed spirit of controversy in that
age. A harsh epithet was called faithful dealing: thus, a learned
clergyman, writing upon Baptism, entitled his work--'The Anabaptists
ducked and plunged over head and ears--washed and shrunk in the
washing'; to which an equally learned Baptist replied, in his
'Baby Baptism mere Babyism.' All this unseemly violence has passed
away, and with it much of the virulence of persecution; soon may
it pass away altogether, only to be pointed at as the evidence
of a barbarous age. We now look back to cruelties perpetrated in
the times of Bunyan by the national religion, as a stigma upon
human nature. 'What a church is this of yours, to be defended by
gaols, and prisons, and whips, and stocks, and violent dealing.'
'Let us fairly try our spiritual weapons, and not carnal cruel
tortures.' 'Let us not hurt or imprison each other, nor put in
the stocks, nor cruelly whip and lacerate each others' bodies; but
let us thrash deceit, whip and beat that and all false doctrines':
these were the breathings of our pilgrim forefathers,--it is the
language of common sense and of real religion. May such sentiments
spread, and soon cover the earth!--GEO. OFFOR.

FOOTNOTES:

1. George Fox's Journal, folio, p. 144.

2. See Burrough's Works, p. 304.

3. Page 201.

4. Page 201.

5. Page 178.



THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.

Seeing the Lord hath been pleased to put it into my heart, to
write a few things to thee (Reader) touching those things which
are most surely believed by all those that are, or shall be saved
(Luke 1:1; Acts 13:38). I think it meet also, to stir up thy
heart by way of remembrance, touching those things that are the
hindrances of thy believing the things that are necessary to the
welfare of thine immortal soul. And indeed, this is the only thing
necessary; it is better to lose all that ever thou hast, than to
have thy soul and body for ever cast into hell; And therefore,
I beseech thee to consider with me a few things touching the
stratagems, or subtle temptations of the devil, whereby he lieth
in wait, if by any means he may, to make thee fall short of eternal
life (1 Peter 5:8).

And first of all, he doth endeavour by all means to keep thee in
love with thy sins and pleasures, knowing that he is sure of thee,
if he can but bewitch thee to live and die in them (1 Cor 6:9,10;
2 Thess 2:12). Yea, he knows that he is as sure of thee, as if he
had thee in hell already (John 3:19). And that he might accomplish
his design on thee in this particular, he laboureth by all means
possible to keep thy conscience asleep in security and self-conceitedness,
keeping thee from all things that might be a means to awaken and
rouse up thine heart. As first, he will endeavour to keep thee
from hearing of the word, by suggesting unto [thee] this and the
other worldly business which must be performed; so that thou wilt
not want excuse to keep thee from the ordinances of Christ, in
hearing, reading, meditation, &c., or else, he seeks to disturb,
and distract thy mind when thou art conversant in these things,
that thou canst not attend to them diligently, and so they become
unprofitable; or else if thou art a little more stirred, he labours
to rock thee asleep again, by casting thee upon, and keeping thee
in evil company, as among rioters, drunkards, jesters, and other
of his instruments, which he employeth on purpose to keep thee
secure, and so ruin thy soul and body for ever and ever.

If not thus, then peradventure he will seek to persuade thee it
is but a melancholy fit, and will put thee upon the works of thy
calling, or thy pleasures, or phys; or some other trick he will
invent, such as best agreeth with thy nature. And thus thy heart
is again deaded, and thou art kept in carnal security, that thou
mightest perish for ever. But if notwithstanding these, and many
cunning slights more which might be named, he cannot so blind, and
benumb thy conscience, but that it doth see and feel sin to be a
burden, intolerable and exceeding sinful; Then in the second place,
his design is to drive thee to despair, by persuading thee that
thy sins are too big to be pardoned; he will seek by all means
possible to aggravate them by all the circumstances of time,
place, person, manner, nature, and continuance of thy sins, he
will object in thy soul, thou hast out-sinned grace, by rejecting
so many exhortations, and admonitions, so many reproofs, so many
tenders of grace; hadst thou closed in with them it had been well
with thee, but now thou hast stood it out so long, that there is
no hope for thee: thou mightest have come sooner, if thou didst
look to be saved, but now it is too late. And withal, that he
might carry on his design upon thee to purpose, he will be sure to
present to thy conscience, the most sad sentences of the scripture;
yea, and set them home with such cunning arguments, that, if it
be possible, he will make thee despair, and make away thyself, as
did Judas.

But if he be prevented in this his intended purpose; the next
thing he doth beset thee with, is to make thee rest upon thine own
righteousness, telling thee, that if thou wilt needs be saved,
thou must earn heaven with thy fingers' ends; and it may be,
he represents to thy soul such a scripture; 'If thou doest well,
shalt thou not be accepted?' And thou having (but in the strength
of nature) kept thyself from thy former grosser pollutions, and
it may be from some more secret sins, are ready to conclude, now
thou dost well; now God accepts thee; now he will pardon, yea,
hath pardoned thee; now thy condition is good, and so goest on
till thou meetest with a searching word, and ministry, which tells
thee, and discovers plainly unto thee, that thou doest all this
while deceive thyself, by a vain hope and confidence; for tho' thou
seek after the law of righteousness, thou hast not yet attained
to the law of righteousness, nor yet canst, because thou seekest
it 'not by faith, but as it were, by the works of the law' (Rom
9:31,32). Here again, thou art left in the mire, and now peradventure
thou seest, that thou art not profited by the works of the law,
nor thy own righteousness: And this makes thee stir a little, but
in process of time, (through the subtle sleights of the devil, and
the wickedness of thine own heart;) thou forgettest thy trouble
of conscience, and slippest into a notion of the gospel, and the
grace thereof, and now thou thinkest thyself cock-sure: Now thou
art able to say, 'He that lives and dies in his sins, shall be
damned for them: He that trusts in his own righteousness, shall
not be saved': Now thou canst cry, 'grace, grace, it's freely by
grace, it's through the death of the man Christ Jesus, that sinners
do attain unto eternal life' (Heb 9:14). This, I say, thou hast
in the notion, and hast not the power of the same in thine heart,
and so it may be thine head is full of the knowledge of the
scriptures, though thine heart be empty of sanctifying grace. And
thus thou dost rejoice for a time. Yet because thou hast not the
root of the matter within thee, in time of temptation thou fallest
away (Luke 8:13).

Now being in this condition, and thinking thyself to be wondrous
well, because of that notion of the truth, and that notion thou
hast in the things of God: I say, being in this state, thou art
liable to these dangers.

First, Thou art like to perish if thou die with this notion in
thine head, except God out of his rich grace do work a saving work
of grace and knowledge in thy heart; for know this, thou mayest
understand glorious mysteries, and yet be a cast-away (1 Cor
13:1-3). Or else,

Secondly, Thou art liable to the next damnable heresy that the
devil sendeth into the world. See and consider Luke 8:13; 2 Timothy
2:18. I say, thou dost lie liable to be carried away with it, and
to be captivated by it; so that at last, through the delusions of
the devil, thou mayest have thy conscience seared as with an hot
iron, so hard, that neither law, nor gospel, can make any entrance
thereinto, to the doing of thee the least good. And indeed, who
are the men that at this day are so deluded by the quakers, and
other pernicious doctrines; but those who thought it enough to
be talkers of the gospel, and grace of God, without seeking and
giving all diligence to make it sure unto themselves? 'And for
this cause God' [shall send] hath sent 'them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness,' as
it is written (2 Thess 2:11,12). And indeed if you mark it, you
shall see, that they be such kind of people, who at this day are
so carried away with the quakers' delusions; namely, a company
of loose ranters, and light notionists, with here and there
a legalist, which were shaking in their principles from time to
time, sometimes on this religion, sometimes on that.[1] And thus
these unstable souls are deluded and beguiled at last (2 Peter
2:14). So that these who before (as one would have thought)
had something of God in them, are now turned such enemies to the
glorious truths of the gospel, that there are none so obstinately
erroneous as they. And indeed it is just with God, to give them
over to 'believe a lie' (2 Thess 2:11), who before were so idle
that they would not receive the truth of God into their hearts,
in the love of it. And to be bewitched by the devil to obey his
temptations, and be damned, who would not obey the truth, that
they might be saved (Gal 3:1).

But you will say, what lies are those, that the devil beguileth
poor souls withal? I shall briefly tell you some of them, but
having before said, that they especially are liable to the danger
of them, who slip into high notions, and rest there; taking that
for true faith which is not. I shall desire thee seriously to
consider this one character of a NOTIONIST. Such an one, whether
he perceives it or not, is puffed up in his fleshly mind, and
advanceth himself above others, thinking but few may compare with
him for religion and knowledge in the scriptures, but are ignorant
and foolish in comparison of him: (Thus knowledge puffeth up, (1
Cor 8:1)) whereas when men receive truth in the love of the truth,
the more the head and heart is filled with the knowledge of the
mystery of godliness, the more it is emptied of its own things,
and is more sensible of its own vileness, and so truly humbled in
its own eyes.

And further, a notionist, though he fall from his former strictness
and seeming holiness, and appear more loose, and vain in his
practices, yet speaks as confidently of himself, as to assurance
of salvation, the love of God, and union with God, as ever. But
now to return, and declare some of those lies which the devil
persuades some of these men to believe.

I. That salvation was not fully, and completely wrought out for
poor sinners by the man Christ Jesus, though he did it gloriously
(Acts 13:38,39), by his death upon the cross, without the gates
of Jerusalem (Heb 13:12 compared with John 19:19,20).

II. This is another of his lies wherewith he doth deceive poor
sinners, bidding them follow the light that they brought into the
world with them, telling them, that light will lead them to the
kingdom; for (say they) it will convince of sin, as swearing,
lying, stealing, covetousness, and the rest of the sins against
the law (Rom 3:20). But 'the law is not of faith' (Gal 3:13). And
then I am sure, that it, with all its motions and convictions, is
never able to justify the soul of any poor sinner. 'For as many
as are of the works of the law are under the curse: for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things
which are written in the book of the law to do them' (Gal 3:10),
but that no man is justified by the law is evident, 'for, The
just shall live by faith' (v 11). Now because I am not altogether
ignorant of the delusion of the devil touching this grace of faith
also, I shall therefore in short give thee (reader) a brief, yet
true description from the scripture. 1. What true justifying faith
is, and what it lays hold upon. 2. I shall shew who it doth come
from. 3. That every one hath it not. 4. What are the fruits of
it.

1. First therefore, true faith is a fruit, work, or gift of the
Spirit of God (Gal 5:22; 2 Thess 1:11; 1 Cor 12:9) whereby a poor
soul is enabled through the mighty operation of God (Col 2:12)
in a sense of its sins and wretched estate to lay hold on the
righteousness, blood, death, resurrection, ascension, intercession,
and coming again of the Son of God which was crucified without the
gates of Jerusalem, for eternal life (John 3:16-18 compared with
Matt 3:17; Gal 2:20; Rom 5:8-10; Rom 3:25; Acts 16:31; Heb 13:12)
according to that saying in Hebrews 11:1 'Now faith is the substance
of things hoped for,' and 'the evidence of things not seen,' that
is, the things that are hoped for faith sees, lays hold upon, and
embraces them (Heb 11:13) as if they were present; yea, it seals
up the certainty of them to the soul. Therefore saith the Apostle,
it is the evidence, or testimony, or witness, of those things
that are not seen as yet with a bodily eye; which are obtained
by the blood of the man Christ Jesus (Heb 9:14 compared with Heb
10:12,19,20) by which the soul sees as in a glass the things that
God hath laid up for them that fear him (1 Cor 13:12; 2 Cor 3:18).

2. If you would know who this faith comes from, read Ephesians 2:8
'For by grace ye are saved [saith the scripture] through faith;
and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God.' Again,
in Philippians 1:29 it is thus written: 'For unto you [that are
believers] it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe
on him, but also to suffer for his sake'; And thus much do the
Apostles hold forth to us in their prayer, or request to the Lord
Jesus, when they say, 'Lord increase our faith' (Luke 17:5), and
he is therefore called 'the author and finisher of our faith'
(Heb 12:2). Also we find in James 1:17 that 'Every good gift and
every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father
of lights,' &c., and therefore faith comes from God, for true
justifying faith is a good gift, and perfect in respect of the
author God, in respect of its object, Christ; and in respect of
the nature, though not in respect of the degree, and measure of
it in us: even as a grain of gold, is as perfect gold, as a pound
of gold, though not so much.

3. All men have not faith, this the Apostle witnesseth in so many
words as we find (2 Thess 3:2; Deut 32:20). Also in Timothy 1:15
'Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure,'
&c. It appeareth also in this, that all do not attain salvation,
which they must needs do if they had true justifying faith (compare
Luke 13:24 and 1 John 5:19 with Mark 16:16. And Heb 4:3 with vv
6 and 11 'they that believe shall be saved').

4. The fruits of it are, (1.) to purify the heart (Acts 15:9;
1 John 3:3), and that, as I said before, by laying hold on what
Jesus Christ had done and suffered for sinners (Acts 13:38,39).
(2.) It fills the soul with peace and joy, in that it lays hold
on the things that are obtained for it (Rom 5:1; 2 Tim 1:9,10;
1 Peter 1:8). (3.) It makes the soul to wait patiently, for the
glory that is to be revealed at the second appearing of the man
Christ Jesus, whom God hath raised from the dead, which hath also
delivered it from the wrath to come, as in Timothy 2:13, 14; 1
Peter 4:13 and 5:1, 4; 1 Thessalonians 1:10.

Quest.--But how (may some say) doth the devil make his delusions
take place in the hearts of poor creatures?

Ans. 1.--Why, first, He labours to render the doctrine of the
Lord Jesus, and salvation by him alone, very odious and low: and
also his ordinances, as hearing, reading, meditation, use of the
scriptures, &c. telling poor sinners that these things are but
poor, low, carnal, beggarly, empty notions; preached up by the
clergymen, who are the scribes and pharisees of this generation;
who have the letter, but not the Spirit of God in them; which lead
men into the form, but not into the power of the Lord Jesus: And
with this persuasion, he also represents the ungodly and base
carriage, or behaviour, of some, who have taken in hand to preach
the doctrine of the Lord Jesus Christ, and thereby he doth render
the gospel of our Lord Jesus the more contemptible and base. But
woe, woe, woe, be to them by whom such offences come (Matt 18:7;
Luke 17:1,2).

Ans. 2. He pretends to lead them up into some higher light,
mysteries, and revelations of the Spirit, into which a very few
have attained or can attain, also bewitching their affections,
and taking them with an earnest pursuit after these his pretended
truths; persuading them, that they shall be as God himself, able
to discern between good and evil (Gen 3:5). And in this he is
exceeding subtle and expert, as having practised it ever since
the days of Adam. These things being thus considered, and in some
measure hungered after, and the rather because they are good (as
they think) to make one wise (Gen 3:6). The poor soul is all on
the sudden possessed with a desperate spirit of delusion, which
carries it away headlong with some high, light, frothy notions, and
spiritual wickedness (which drown it in perdition and destruction)
that doth feed and tickle the heart a while, to the end it may
make way for a farther manifestation of itself in the poor deluded
soul; which when it hath attained to, it doth then begin to bring
the soul into a clearer sight of those things, which it was loth
it should know at the first; but having fitted the soul by degrees
for a further possession of itself, at last it begins to hold forth
its new gospel; shewing the soul a new Christ, and new scriptures.
The new and false Christ, is a Christ crucified within, dead
within, risen again within, and ascended within, in opposition to
the Son of Mary, who was crucified without, dead without, risen
again without, and ascended in a cloud away from his disciples
into heaven without them (Acts 1:9-11).

Now this new and false Christ, hath a new and false faith belonging
to his gospel, which faith is this, to apprehend this Christ
crucified within, dead within, risen again within, and ascended
within: But ask them for a scripture that doth positively prove
their doctrine, they also have a scripture, but it is within, it
doth bear witness within, and if they had not that, (though that
be of the devil's making) I am sure they would have none out of
God's holy scriptures, for they will allow of no crucified Christ,
but he that was crucified without the gates of Jerusalem (Heb
13:12; John 19:17,18). Dead and buried in the sepulchre of Joseph
of Arimathea (John 19:38-41). Was raised again out of that sepulchre
into which Joseph had laid him (John 20:1-12). Who went before his
disciples into Galilee (Mark 16:7). And to Emmaus (Luke 24:15).
Shewed them his hands and his feet, where the nails had gone through
(Luke 24:39,40). Did eat and drink with them after his resurrection:
Was seen of them on earth forty days after his resurrection (Acts
1:3). And after that ascended away in a cloud, out of the sight of
his disciples into heaven (Acts 1:9-11). Which Christ ever lives
to make intercession for us (Heb 7:25). Who will come again also
at the end of the world to judgment (Acts 10:42, 17:31; 2 Peter
3:10,11). Who also is the same that hath obtained eternal redemption
for us (Acts 13:37-39; Rom 3:25; Eph 1:7; Rev 1:5; Heb 1:2, 9:14).
This I say, or rather the scriptures say, is God's Christ (Matt
16:16). In whom he is well pleased (Matt 3:17). Neither doth God
own any other, or allow of any other: For there is none other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, than the
name of Jesus of Nazareth (Acts 4:10 compared with vv 11,12). But
as I told you before, the way to be thus deluded, is first to
render God's Christ odious and low, with a pretence of some further
light and revelations; and thus professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools (Rom 1:22).

Quest.--But you will say, doth not the scripture make mention of
a Christ within? (Col 1:27; 2 Cor 13:5; Rom 8:10).

Ans.--I answer, God's Christ was, and is, true God and true man;
he was born of the Virgin Mary, true God, and true man (Matt 1:23).
'And they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted
is, God with us,' or God in our nature, according to 1 Timothy
3:16 'God was manifested in the flesh': And John 1:14 'the word
was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth.' And in Hebrews 2:14 'Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he,' that is, God (Heb 1:8), 'also
himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.' Now
as he was thus true God, and true man, so he became our redeemer
and Saviour. Compare the first and second chapters to the Hebrews
together, and you may clearly see that this is a glorious truth,
that he who is the first and the last (Rev 1:17,18, 2:8) humbled
himself, and made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And was
this all? No. He humbled himself unto death, even the death of
the cross (Phil 2:7,8 compared with Rev 1:17,18 and Rev 2:8 with
Gal 1:4). Now after this Christ of God, true God and true man,
had wrought out eternal redemption for us poor miserable sinners
(Heb 9:14 compared with 1 Tim 1:15). I say, after he had done
this, he ascended up into heaven, and there ever lives to make
intercession for us. Now this Christ, having thus completely wrought
out our salvation, sends his disciples abroad to preach the same
to poor sinners (Acts 2; 2 Cor 5:19,20) and so many as were ordained
to eternal life, when they heard the word, or the gospel preached
by the Apostles, which gospel was this Christ (1 Cor 1:17 compared
with v 23). I say, so many as were ordained to eternal life, when
they heard the word, the Holy Ghost or Spirit of Christ, fell upon
them (Acts 10:44 compared with Acts 13:48) which did lead them
into the redemption and glorious things that the Lord Jesus had
laid up and prepared for them (John 16:13-15; 1 Cor 2:9). Which
Spirit was the earnest of their inheritance, until the redemption
of the purchased possession, to the praise of his glory (Eph 1:13,14).
The earnest of their inheritance was a glorious encouragement to
them that had it, to hope for the glory that was to be revealed
at the appearing of Jesus Christ, which is the meaning of that
place in Colossians 1:27. And that will be seen clearly, if we
compare it with Ephesians 1:13,14 before recited. Now this Spirit,
which sometimes is called the Spirit of Christ (2 Cor 13:5). This
Spirit, I say, being given to all those that were ordained to
eternal life, it must needs follow, that those that had not this
Spirit, but did live and die without it, were not ordained to
eternal life, and so were none of Christ's; but were reprobates
(Rom 8:9) for the Spirit of Christ is the distinguishing character
betwixt a believer and an unbeliever, he that hath it, and is led
by it, is a child of God (Rom 7:4), but he that hath it not is
none of Christ's.

So then, the answer that I give to the question, is this. The
Spirit of Christ that is given to believers, is the earnest or
hope of that inheritance that Christ hath already purchased, and
is now preparing for so many as he hath given, or shall give this
holy spirit unto. And for the proof hereof, read Ephesians 1:13,
14. In whom (saith the scripture) ye also trusted, after that ye
heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation. In whom
also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit
of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance; (which
inheritance is the eternal redemption that was purchased by Christ
for poor sinners (Heb 9:15)) until the redemption of the purchased
possession, unto the praise of his glory. Again (Gal 5:5), 'For ye
through the Spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.'
And (Col 1:27) the Apostle speaking of this great mystery, saith,
'To whom God would make know what is the riches of the glory of
this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you the hope of
glory'; which glory was then revealed to the saints no otherwise
than by faith, as the Apostle saith, 'We rejoice in hope of the
glory of God' (Rom 5:2). Which hope is begotten by the Spirit's
shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts (v 5), which hope
is not yet seen, that is, not yet actually enjoyed; 'For we are
saved by hope: But hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man
seeth, why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see
not, then do we with patience wait for it' (Rom 8:24,25). And as
I say, the cause of believers' hope is this, Christ, or the Spirit
of Christ, in them, the hope of glory. And indeed he may well hope
for glory to come, who hath already an earnest thereof given him
of God, and that earnest no less than the Spirit of the Lord Jesus
(Rom 8:16,17).

But now, this Spirit, which is the cause of a believer's hope,
all men have not (Jude 19; Eph 2:12; Rom 8:9; John 14:16,17).
Therefore what a sad doctrine is that which saith, follow the light
that Christ hath enlightened every man withal, which cometh into
the world; which light is the conscience, that convinceth of sins
against the law; and that you may see clearly if you mind that
scripture (John 8:9) which saith, That the Pharisees, [which
had neither the love of God, nor his word, abiding in them (John
5:38,43)] when they had heard Christ speaking thus to them, He
that is without sin among you, &c. being convicted by their own
consciences, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even
to the least. But the devil, that he might be sure not to miss of
his design, labours by all means to render the scriptures also
odious and low, telling them of the scriptures within; which
Christ never taught, nor yet his disciples: But they being given
up of God to a reprobate mind, have given themselves over, rather
to follow the suggestions of the devil, than the holy scriptures
which God hath commanded us to betake ourselves to (Isa 8:20
compared with John 5:39) which scripture is called the sword of
the Spirit (Eph 6:17), which weapon our Lord Jesus himself held
up, to overcome the devil withal (Matt 4:4,7,10; Luke 4:4,8,12).
But this design (as I told you) the devil carries on, by pretending
to shew them a more excellent way which they may attain to, if
they be but wise, and follow what is made known unto them from
the light within them.

But, reader, that thou mayest be able to escape the snare of this
cunning hunter, I shall lay thee down some few directions, which
if the Lord give thee grace to follow, thou shalt escape these
WICKED DELUSIONS.

Direct. 1. And first of all, I do admonish thee to be very serious
touching thine estate and condition; and examine thine own heart
by the rule of the word of God, whether or no, thou hast as yet
any beginnings of desiring after religion: and if thou findest that
thou hast lived until now in ignorance, and hast not set thyself
to remember thy Creator as thou art commanded (Eccl 12:1), then
I beseech thee consider that thou art under the wrath of Almighty
God, and hast been so ever since thou camest into the world (Eph
2:1,2), being then in thy first parents, those didst transgress
against thy maker (Rom 5:18), 'Therefore as by the offence
of one,' that is, of Adam (v 14), 'judgment came upon all men
to condemnation.' Besides the many SINS thou hast committed ever
since thou wast born: sins against the law of God, and sins against
the gospel of the grace of God; sins against the long-suffering
and forbearance of God, and sins against his judgments; sins of
omission, and sins of commission, in thoughts, words, and actions:
consider, I say, thy condition; yea, get a very great sense of thy
sins that thou hast committed; and that thou mayest so do, beg of
God to convince thee by his Holy Spirit, not only of sins against
law, but also of that damning sin, the sin of unbelief.

Direct. 2. If thou by grace, art but brought into such an estate
as to see thyself in a lost condition because of sin, without the
Lord Jesus; then in the next place, have a care of resting on any
DUTY done, though it be never so specious; I say, have a care of
making any stay anywhere on this side the Lord Jesus Christ: but
above all strive to believe, that that very Man that was born of
the Virgin Mary, did come into the world on purpose to save thee,
as well as other poor sinners: I say, thou must not be content
till thou art enabled to say, 'He loved me, and gave himself for
me' (Gal 2:20). And that thou mayest be sure to attain to this
most precious faith, (for so it is) be much in applying the freest
promises to thy own soul; yea, those that have no conditions annexed
to them, as these, or other like (Rev 22:17; Jer 31:3, John 6:37
also 14:19; Hosea 14:3). I say, labour to apply to thy own soul
in particular, the most glorious and freest promises in the book
of God. And if at any time the devil besets thee by his temptations,
(for so is his wonted manner to do, and so much the more, as he
sees thee labour to get out of his reach) I say, when he assails
thee with his fiery darts, be sure to act faith on the most free
promises, and have a care that thou dost not enter into any dispute
with him, but rather resist him by those blessed promises that
are laid down in the word of God: And withal, be sure to meditate
upon the blood of the man Christ Jesus, who also is the true God,
and read those scriptures that do most fully and clearly speak of
it (as 1 John 1:7; Eph 1:7; Heb 9:14; Rom 3:25).

Direct. 3. But if thou say (as it is often the speech of poor
souls lying under a sense of sin, and the apprehensions of wrath
due to it) I cannot apply the promises to mine own soul; and the
reason is, because my SINS are so great, and so many. Consider,
and know it for a truth, that the more and greater thou seest thy
sins to be, the more cause hast thou to believe; yea, thou must
therefore believe because thy sins are great: David made it an
encouragement to himself, or rather the Spirit of the Lord made
it his encouragement, to crave, yea to hope for pardon, because
he had greatly transgressed (Psa 25:11). 'For thy name's sake,
O Lord, [saith he] pardon mine iniquity; for it is great.' As if
he had said, O Lord, thy name will be more glorified, the riches
of thy grace will be more advanced, thy mercy and goodness will
more shine, and be magnified in pardoning me who am guilty of
great iniquity, than if thou pardonest many others who have not
committed such heinous offences. And I dare say, the reason why
thou believest not, is not because thy sins are great, but because
thou dost reason too much with that wicked enemy of man's salvation,
and givest way too much to the fleshly reasoning of thine own
heart. For Christ hath said, 'He that cometh unto me, I will in
no wise cast out' (John 6:37). And again, 'Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow' (Isa 1:18). And Christ
calleth those that labour, and are heavy laden, to come to him,
with promise to give them rest (Matt 11:28). Wherefore thou must
not say, my sins are too big; but thou must say, because I am a
great sinner; yea, because I have sinned above many of my companions,
and am nearer to hell, and eternal damnation than they, because
of my sins, therefore will I cry unto the Lord, and say, O Lord,
pardon my sins, for they are great.

Now that thou mayest not be deceived in a matter of so great
concernment, have a special care of these three things.

Caution 1. First, Have a care of putting off thy trouble of spirit
the wrong way, which thou mayest do three ways; (1.) When thy
conscience flieth in thy face, and tells thee of thy sins, thou
dost put off convictions the wrong way, if thou dost stop thy
conscience by promising to reform thyself, and lead a new life,
and gettest off thy guilt by so doing: for though thou mayest by
this means still and quiet thy conscience for a time, yet thou
canst not hereby satisfy and appease the wrath of God: yea, saith
God to such, 'Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much
soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me' (Jer 2:22).

(2.) If when thou art under the guilt of thy sins, thou puttest
off convictions by thy performance of DUTIES, and so satisfiest
thy conscience, then also thou dost put off thy convictions the
wrong way: for God will not be satisfied with anything less than
the blood, righteousness, resurrection, and intercession of his
own Son (Acts 4:12). And thou shouldest not satisfy thyself with
any less than God would have thee to satisfy thyself withal, and
that is the water of life (Isa 55:1,2) which water of life thy
duties, and all thy righteousness, is not; for they are as filthy
rags (Isa 64:6).

(3.) Have a care that when thou art under conviction, thou dost
not satisfy thyself with a notion of the free grace of the gospel;
my meaning is, do not content thyself with any measure of knowledge
that thou canst attain unto, or bottom thy peace upon it, thinking
thou art now well enough, because thou canst speak much of the
grace of God, and his love in Christ to poor sinners. For this
thou mayest have, and do; and yet be but a companion for Demas,
yea, for Judas and the rest of the damned multitude: As the Apostle
saith, For all this thou mayest be but as sounding brass, and as
a tinkling cymbal; that is, nothing but a sound (1 Cor 13:1-3).

Caution 2. But Secondly, If thou wouldest not be deceived, then
have a care to avoid false doctrines, which are according to the
spirit of the devil, and not after Christ. As,

(1.) If any doctrine doth come unto thee, that tells thee, except
thou art circumcised after the manner of Moses, thou canst not
be saved: that is, if any man come unto thee, and tell thee, thou
must do such and such works of the law, to the end thou mayest
present thyself the better before God, do not receive him: For
'to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness' (Rom 4:5).

(2.) If any come unto thee, and bring such a doctrine as this; That
thou mayest be saved by grace, though thou walk in the imaginations
of thy own wicked heart: His doctrine also is devilish, do not
receive him (Deut 29:19-23).

(3.) But if any come unto thee, and doth in truth advance the blood,
righteousness, resurrection, intercession, and second coming of
that very Man in the clouds of heaven, that was born of the virgin
Mary; and doth press thee to believe on what he hath done (shewing
thee thy lost condition without him) and to own it as done for
thee in particular, and withal doth admonish thee, not to trust in
a bare notion of it, but to receive it into thy heart, so really,
that thy very heart and soul may burn in love to the Lord Jesus
Christ again: and doth also teach thee, that the love of Christ
should and must constrain thee, not to live to thyself: But to
him that loved thee, and gave himself for thee (2 Cor 5:14,15;
Eph 4:21-24; 1 Cor 7:23). 'Ye are bought with a price; be not ye
the servants of men.' If his conversation be also agreeable to
his doctrine, a believing, honest, loving self-denying, courteous
conversation, (he also is a true Christian). Receive that doctrine
and receive it really; for it is the doctrine of God, and of
Christ (Gal 4:4, 1:4; Eph 1:7; Rev 1:5; Acts 13:38; John 1:29;
Acts 4:12, 10:40-42; 1 Thess 1:10; Mark 13; 2 Peter 1:5-10).
Considering the end of their conversation Jesus Christ, yesterday,
and to-day, and the same for ever (Heb 13:7,8).

Caution 3. Again, If thou wouldest not be deceived, then beware
of slighting any known truth that thou findest revealed, or made
known to thee in the gospel; but honour and obey it in its place,
be it (as thou thinkest) never so low (John 14:15).

(1.) Have a care that thou do not undervalue, or entertain low
thoughts of God, Christ the Son of Mary, and the holy scriptures,
but search them (John 5:39). And give attendance to the reading
of them (1 Tim 4:13). For, I will tell thee, he that slights the
scriptures, doth also slight him of whom they testify. And I will
tell thee also, that for this cause God hath given up many to
strong delusions, that they might believe a lie: 'that they all
might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness' (2 Thess 2:11,12).

(2.) Therefore I say unto thee, In the name of the Lord Jesus,
the Son of Mary, the Son of God, the very creator of heaven and
earth, and all things that are therein; have a care of thyself;
for the devil doth watch for thee day and night (1 Peter 5:8).
Thine own heart also doth labour to deceive thee, if by any means
it may (Jer 17:9). Therefore do not thou trust it; for if thou
do, thou wilt not do wisely (Prov 28:26). I say therefore, have a
care that thou labour in the strength of the Lord Jesus, to escape
all these things; for if thou fall into any one of them, it will
make way for a farther income of sin and the devil, through whose
deceitfulness thy heart will be hardened, and thou wilt be more
incapable of receiving instruction, or reaping advantage, by and
from the ordinances of Jesus Christ: the rather therefore, give
all diligence to believe in the Christ of God, which is the Son
of Mary, and be sure to apply all that he hath done, and is doing,
unto thyself, as for thee in particular; which thing if thou dost,
thou shalt never fall.

And now, reader, I shall also give thee some few considerations,
and so I shall commit thee to the Lord.

Consider, 1. That God doth hold out his grace, and mercy freely,
and that to every one (Rev 22:17; Isa 55:1-7).

Consider, 2. That there is no way to attain to this free mercy
and grace, but by him that was born of the Virgin Mary; for he
himself saith, 'I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man
cometh unto the Father but by me' (John 14:6 compared with Matt
1:20,21).

Consider, 3. If thou strivest to go over any other way, thou wilt
be but a thief and a robber (John 10:1 compared with 9). And know
that none of these (so continuing) shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven (1 Cor 6:9,10).

Consider, 4. That if the devil should be too hard for thee, and
deceive thee, by persuading thee to embrace, or entertain a new
gospel, which neither Christ nor his disciples did allow of, it
would make thee gnash teeth when it is too late.

Consider, 5. That though thou hast been deluded by Satan to this
day, yet if now thine eyes be opened to see and acknowledge it,
though as yet thou hast been either exceedingly wicked (1 Tim
1:13), or an idle (Matt 20:6,7) lukewarm, hypocritical professor
(Rev 3:17-19); and hast stood it out to the last (Eze 18:20-22);
for all this there is hope; and if now thou receive the truth in
the love of the truth, being as willing to be rid of the filth of
sin, as the guilt of it, thou shalt be saved.

Consider, 6. That the Lord will call thee to judgment for all thy
sins past, present, and what else thou shalt practise hereafter,
especially for thy rejecting and trampling on the blood of his
Son, the Man Christ Jesus: And if thou dost not agree with thine
adversary, now, while thou art in the way, 'Lest he hale thee
to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the
officer cast thee into prison. I tell thee, thou shalt not depart
thence, till thou hast paid the very last mite' (Luke 12:58,59).

And therefore I beseech thee to consider; Here is at this time
life and death, heaven and hell, everlasting joy, and everlasting
torment set before thee. Here is also the way to have the one,
and the way to escape the other. Now if the Lord shall do thee any
good by what I have spoken, I hope it will be a means to stir me
up to thank the Lord that ever he did use such a sinner as I am,
in the work of his gospel. And here I shall close up what I have
said, desiring thee (if thou be a christian) to pray for him who
desires to continue.

Thy servant in the Lord Jesus Christ, though less than the least
of all saints,

JOHN BUNYAN


FOOTNOTE:

1. The word 'quakers' must not be misunderstood as referring to
the society of friends, but to some deluded individuals calling
themselves quakers; the friends were not formed into a society
for some years after this was written--Ed.



THE EPISTLE WRIT BY MR. BURTON, MINISTER AT BEDFORD

TO THE READER,

Reader, thou hast in this small treatise, set before thee, the
several pieces of that great and glorious mystery, Jesus Christ,
God manifested in the flesh: And if thou art enlightened by the
Spirit of Christ, here thou mayest see by that Spirit how Jesus
Christ the Son of God, the Son of Mary, is both true God and true
Man, both natures making but one Christ, one Jesus, as Philippians
2:5-9 where speaking first of his being God, and then of his
taking upon him the nature of man; afterwards in the 8th and 9th
verses, he saith, he (meaning this Jesus) humbled himself, &c.,
and God (meaning the Father) hath highly exalted him, &c. speaking
of both natures God and man as together making but one Christ; who
is the Saviour, and is to be believed and trusted in for salvation
not only as God, but as man also; and those who do not thus make
him the object of their faith, will surely fall short of pardon
of sin, and of salvation; 'through this man [speaking of Christ
as crucified at Jerusalem] is preached unto you the forgiveness
of sins' (Act 13:38). And saith he, there is 'one mediator between
God and men, the man Christ Jesus' (1 Tim 2:5); and this discovers
the damnable errors of those commonly called Socinians, who on
the one hand deny him that was born of the Virgin Mary to be true
God as well as true Man: And this is also quite contrary to those
commonly called Familists, Ranters, Quakers, or others, who on
the other hand either deny Christ to be a real Man without them,
blasphemously fancying him to be only God manifest in their flesh;
or else make his human nature with the fulness of the godhead in
it, to be but a type of God, to be manifest in the saints, and
so according to their wicked imagination, his human nature was
to be laid aside after he had offered it up on the cross without
the gate at Jerusalem, contrary to Acts 1:1-3, 9-11 compared with
the last chapter of Luke, vv 39, 40, 50, 51 where it is clearly
held forth, that the man Christ rose again out of the grave, with
the same body which was crucified and laid in the grave, and was
taken up above the clouds into heaven with the same real body,
and that he shall again descend form heaven in that same glorious
body of flesh, as Acts 1:9-11. And this sure truth of Christ being
the Saviour and Mediator, as Man, and not only as God, will also
shew serious believers what to think of some, who though they
will not (it may be) deny that Christ is a real man without them
in the heavens as well as God, yet do own him to be the Saviour
only as God, first dwelling in that flesh that was born of the
Virgin, and then dwelling in saints, and thus both beginning and
perfecting their salvation within them, and so indeed do hold Christ
as Man, to be only (I say to be only) the saved or glorified one
of God, together with the saints his members, only something in
another and more glorious manner and measure than the saints; and
these high flown people are in this very like to Familists and
Quakers, undervaluing the Lord Jesus Christ, God-man, and though
they may speak much of Christ, yet they do not rightly and savingly
lay him for their foundation.

Now as a help against all these dangerous things, thou hast here
the main things of Christ laid down before thee briefly, and fully
proved by the scriptures:

First, Of his being true God out of flesh from eternity, and then
of his taking flesh, or the nature of man upon him in the womb of
the Virgin, and so his fulfilling the law, his dying for sins at
Jerusalem, his rising again without, his ascending into heaven
without, and not into a fancied heaven only within, as some say;
his interceding in heaven for all his, and his coming again in his
body of flesh to judge the world. And if thou art yet in a state
of nature, though covered over with an outside profession, here
thou mayest find something (if the Spirit of Christ meet thee in
reading) to convince thee of the sad condition thou art in, and
to shew thee the righteousness thou art to fly to by faith,
and to trust in for salvation, when convinced of sin; which is a
righteousness wrought by that God-man Jesus Christ without thee,
dying without thee at Jerusalem for sinners: here also thou mayest
see the difference between true and false faith. If thou art a
true believer, as these things are the foundation of thy faith, so
they may be of great use for thee to mediate upon, and to exercise
thy faith in, particularly in mediation, and in this way to seek
daily for a higher faith in these truths, to be given into thy
heart from heaven; and there is a great need of this, for though
these truths be commonly known amongst professors to the notion of
them, yet very few know or believe them aright: nay, it may well
be said in this age, that, if the faith of the true saints was well
sifted, and tradition, notion, and the apprehensions of their own
reason and fancy was sifted out, most of them would be found to
have very little knowledge of, and faith in, these common truths.

Secondly, These truths being put thus together, and plainly
proved by the scriptures, may be a great help (through the Spirit
concurring) to strengthen thee against all those damnable heresies
which are spread abroad, which deny the Lord Jesus Christ either
plainly, or more cunningly and mysteriously. And

Thirdly, The more thou art rooted and set down from heaven in the
faith of these truths of Christ, to believe fully the glorious
reality of them, and their interest in them, the more heavenly
peace and joy thou wilt have (1 Peter 1:7,8) and also thou wilt
hereby attain the more true holiness and purity of heart and life,
'purifying their hearts by faith' (Acts 15:9). And then the more
thou hast of the right faith of Christ, and of his things in thy
heart, the more strong and valiant wilt thou be in spirit, to do
any work private or public for Jesus Christ, like Stephen, who
being full of faith, and of the Holy Spirit, was also full of
power (Acts 6:8).

In this book thou hast also laid down from the scriptures, how
Jesus Christ is without the saints as Man, and yet dwelleth within
them, that is, something of his divine nature or his blessed Spirit
dwells within them, which Spirit is sometime called, The Spirit
of Christ (Rom 8:9). He that hath not the Spirit of Christ, &c.
and sometime called Christ, 'If Christ be in you' &c. (Rom 8:10).
And also how we may know whether it be Christ and the Spirit of
Christ within, or a false spirit calling itself Christ, and that
is thus; If it be indeed Christ within, that is, the Spirit of
Christ God-man; why then it teaches that man or woman in whom it
is, to apply, and trust in Christ without for salvation; Christ
as born of the Virgin Mary, as fulfilling the law without them,
as dying without the gate of Jerusalem as a sacrifice for sin; it
teaches them to trust in the Man Christ as rising again out of the
grave without them, as ascending into, and interceding in heaven
without for them; and as to come from that heaven again in his
flesh to judge the world. Thus the man Christ himself saith, 'When
he [the Spirit of truth] is come, &c. he shall glorify me' (John
16:13,14). He shall make you more to prize, admire and glorify me,
who am both God and man, and who shall be absent from you touching
my body. Then follows, for he shall take of mine (of my glorious
things) and shew them to you; he shall take my divine and human
nature, my birth, my person and offices, my obedience, death,
satisfaction, my resurrection, ascension and intercession, and of
my second coming in the clouds with my mighty angels to judgment,
and shall shew them, or clear them up to you: He shall take of my
salvation, which I have wrought for you in my own person without
you: And he shall take of my glory and exaltation in the heavens,
and shew to you. Now to mind this one thing, and to be set down in
a right understanding of it, by the Spirit, from the scriptures,
will be of great concernment to thee and me; for, for want of this,
many professors have split themselves, some looking only on what
Christ hath done and suffered without them, resting in an historical,
traditional, and indeed a fancied faith of it, without looking for
the Spirit of Jesus Christ to come with power into their hearts,
without which they cannot rightly know, nor rightly believe in
Christ the Son of God without them, so as to have any share or
interest in him, 'If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his' (Rom 8:9). Others have been depending too much upon
something they call Christ, and the righteousness of Christ within
them, in opposition to Christ and his righteousness without them,
from which all true saints have their justification and comfort,
it being received through the operation of the Spirit which dwells
in them; and however these may talk much of Christ within them,
yet it is manifest, that it is not the Spirit of Christ, but the
spirit of the devil; in that it doth not glorify, but slight and
reject the man Christ and his righteousness which was wrong without
them: Reader, in this book thou wilt not meet with high flown airy
notions, which some delight in, counting them high mysteries,
but the sound, plain, common, (and yet spiritual and mysterious)
truths of the gospel, and if thou art a believer, thou must needs
reckon them so, and the more, if thou hast not only the faith of
them in thy heart, but art daily living in the spiritual sense and
feeling of them, and of thy interest in them. Neither doth this
treatise offer to thee doubtful controversial things, or matters
of opinions, as some books chiefly do, which when insisted upon,
the weightier things of the gospel have always done more hurt
than good: But here thou hast things certain, and necessary to be
believed, which thou canst not too much study. Therefore pray, that
thou mayest receive this word which is according to the scriptures
in faith and love, not as the word of man, but as the word of God,
without respect of persons, and be not offended because Christ
holds forth the glorious treasure of the gospel to thee in a poor
earthen vessel, by one who hath neither the greatness nor the
wisdom of this world to commend him to thee; for as the scripture,
saith Christ, (who was low and contemptible in the world himself)
ordinarily chooseth such for himself, and for the doing of his
work (1 Cor 1:26-28). Not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called: But God hath chosen the foolish
things of the world, &c. This man is not chosen out of an earthly,
but out of the heavenly university, the church of Christ, which
church, as furnished with the Spirit, gifts, and graces of Christ,
was in the beginning, and still is, and will be to the end of the
world, that out of which the word of the Lord, and so all true
gospel ministers must proceed, whether learned or unlearned, as
to human learning (1 Cor 12:27,28). And though this man hath not
the learning or wisdom of man, yet, through grace he hath received
the teaching of God, and the learning of the Spirit of Christ, which
is the thing that makes a man both a Christian and a minister of
the gospel. 'The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned,'
&c. (Is 50:4 compared with Luke 4:18) where Christ, as man, saith,
'The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to
preach the gospel to the poor,' &c. He hath, through grace taken
these three heavenly degrees, to wit, union with Christ, the anointing
of the Spirit, and experience of the temptations of Satan, which
do more fit a man for that mighty work of preaching the gospel,
than all university learning and degrees that can be had.

My end in writing these few lines is not to set up man, but having
had experience with many other saints of this man's soundness in
the faith, of his godly conversation, and his ability to preach
the gospel, not by human art, but by the Spirit of Christ, and that
with much success in the conversion of sinners when there are so
many carnal empty preachers, both learned and unlearned; I say having
had experience of this, and judging this book may be profitable
to many others, as well as to myself: I thought it my duty upon
this account (though I be very unfit for it) to bear witness with
my brother to the plain and simple (and yet glorious) truths of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And now reader, the Lord give thee and me a
right understanding in these things, that we may live and die not
with a traditional notional dead faith, but with a right spiritual
lively faith of Christ in our heart, wrought by the mighty power
of God; such a faith as may make Jesus Christ more real and precious
to us than any thing in the world, as may purify our hearts, and
make us new creatures, that so we may be sure to escape the wrath
to come, and after this life enjoy eternal life and glory through
the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Farewell, thine to serve thee in the Lord Jesus, JOHN BURTON.



SOME GOSPEL TRUTHS OPENED, &c.

Forasmuch as many have taken in Hand to set forth their several
Judgments concerning the Son of the Virgin Mary, the Lord JESUS
CHRIST; and some of those many having most grossly erred from the
simplicity of the Gospel, it seemed good to me, having had some
Knowledge of these things, to write a few words, to the end, if
the Lord will, Souls might not be so horribly deluded by those
several corrupt Principles that are gone into the World concerning
him.

Now, that there is such a thing as a Christ, I shall not spend
much time in proving of; only I shall shew you, that he was first
promised to the fathers, and afterwards expected by their children:
But before I do that, I shall speak a few words concerning God's
FORE-ORDAINING AND PURPOSING, THAT A CHRIST, A SAVIOUR, SHOULD
BE, AND THAT BEFORE THE WORLD BEGAN. Now God in his own wisdom and
counsel, knowing what would come to pass, as if it were already
done (Rom 4:17). He knowing that man would break his commandments,
and so throw himself under eternal destruction, did in his own
purpose fore-ordain such a thing as the rise of him that should
fall, and that by a Saviour, 'According as he hath chosen us in
him, [meaning the Saviour] before the foundation of the world'
(Eph 1:4). That is, God seeing that we would transgress, and break
his commandment, did before choose some of those that would fall,
and give them to him that should afterward purchase them actually,
though in the account of God, his blood was shed before the world
was (Rev 13:8). I say, in the account of God, his Son was slain!
that is, according to God's purpose and conclusion, which he
purposed in himself before the word was; as it is written (2 Tim
1:9), 'Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling,
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before the world began.' As also, in 1 Peter 1:20,
Where the Apostle speaking of Christ, and the redemption purchased
by him for sinners, saith of him, 'Who verily was fore-ordained
before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last
days for you, who by him do believe in God, that raised him up
from the dead.' God having thus purposed in himself, that he would
save some of them that by transgression had destroyed themselves,
did with the everlasting Son of his love, make an agreement, or
bargain, that upon such and such terms, he would give him a company
of such poor souls as had by transgression fallen from their own
innocency and uprightness, into those wicked inventions that they
themselves had sought out (Eccl 7:29). The agreement also how this
should be, was made before the foundation of the world was laid
(Titus 1:2). The Apostle, speaking of the promise, or covenant
made between God and the Saviour (for that is his meaning,) saith
on this wise; 'In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie,
promised before the world began.' Now this promise, or covenant
was made with none but with the Son of God, the Saviour. And it
must needs be so; for there was none with God before the world
began, but he by whom he made the world, as in Proverbs 8 from
verse 22 to verse 31 which was and is, the Son of his love.

This covenant, or bargain, had these conditions in it.

First, That the Saviour should take upon him flesh and blood,
the same nature that the sons of men were partakers of (sin only
excepted) (Heb 2:14, 4:15). And this was the will or agreement
that God had made with him: And therefore when he speaks of doing
the will of God (Heb 10:5) he saith, 'a body hast thou prepared
me,' (as according to thy promise (Gen 3:15) which I was to take
of a woman,) and in it I am come to do thy will, O God, as it is
written of me in the volume of thy book (v 7).

Second, The Saviour was to bring everlasting righteousness to
justify sinners withal (Dan 9:24,25). The Messias, or Saviour, shall
bring in everlasting righteousness, and put an end to iniquity,
as it is there written, 'To make an end of sins, and to
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness.' This, I say, was to be brought into the world by
the Saviour, according to the covenant, or agreement, that was
between God and Christ before the world began, which God, that
cannot lie, promised at that time (Titus 1:2).

Third, He was to accomplish this everlasting righteousness by
spilling his most precious blood, according to the terms of the
covenant, or bargain; and therefore when God would shew his people
what the agreement was that he and the Saviour had made, even
before the covenant was accomplished and sealed actually. See for
this Zechariah 9 (where he is speaking of him that should be the
Saviour,) verse 11, 'As for thee also [meaning the Saviour] by
the blood of thy covenant,' or as some render it, whose covenant
is by blood (which is all to one purpose) 'I [meaning God] have
sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.'
The meaning is this: As for thee also, seeing the covenant, or
bargain that was made between me and thee before the world was,
is accomplished in my account, as if it were actually and really
done, with all the conditions that were agreed upon by me and
thee; I have therefore, according to that agreement that was on
my part, sent forth the prisoners, and those that were under the
curse of my law, out of the pit wherein there is no water; seeing
thou also hast completely fulfilled in my account whatsoever was
on thy part to be done, according to our agreement. And thus is
that place to be understood in John 17:9, 'I pray for them: I pray
not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me' (which
I covenanted with thee for) 'thine they were and thou gavest them
me,' (but on such and such conditions as are before-mentioned (Zech
9)). And again, 'According as he hath chosen us in him, [that is,
in Christ,] before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy and without blame before him in love' (Eph 1:4). Now, seeing
this was thus concluded upon by those that did wish well to the
souls and bodies of poor sinners, after the world was made by them,
and after they had said, 'let us make man in our image, after our
likeness' (Gen 1:26). And after man, whom God had made upright,
had by transgression fallen from that state into which God at first
placed him, and thrown himself into a miserable condition by his
transgression, then God brings out of his love that which he and
his Son had concluded upon, and begins now to make forth that to
the world, which he had purposed in himself before the world began
(Eph 1:4,9; 2 Tim 1:9).

1. Now the first discovery that was made to a lost creature of
the love of God, was made to fallen Adam (Gen 3:15). Where it is
said, 'I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between
thy seed and her seed'; which is the Saviour (Gal 4:4), 'It shall
bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.' This was the
first discovery of the love of God to lost man: This was the gospel
which was preached to Adam in his generation; in these words was
held forth to them in that generation, that which should be farther
accomplished in after generations.

2. Another discovery of the love of God in the gospel, was held
forth to Noah, in that he would have him to prepare an ark to
save himself withal; which ark did type out the Lord that was to
come, and be the Saviour of those whom he before had covenanted
for with God the Father. 'And God said unto Noah, The end of all
flesh is come before me;--make thee an ark of gopher wood' (Gen
6:13,14, 7:1). 'The Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy
house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in
this generation.'

3. God breaks out with a farther discovery of himself in love
to that generation in which Abraham lived, Where he saith, 'And
in thee, [that is, from thee shall Christ come through, in whom]
shall all families of the earth be blessed' (Gen 12:3). This was
also a farther manifestation of the good will of God to poor lost
sinners; and through this discovery of the gospel, did Abraham
see that which made him rejoice (John 8:56).

4. When the time was come that Moses was to be a prophet to the
people of his generation, then God did more gloriously yet break
forth with one type after another, as the blood of bulls, and
lambs, and goats: Also sacrifices of divers manners, and of several
things, which held forth that Saviour more clearly which God had
in his own purpose and decree determined to be sent; for these
things (the types) were a shadow of that which was to come, which
was the substance (Heb 9:9,10, 10:1,5-7). Now when these things
were thus done, when God had thus signified to the world, what
he intended to do in after times, presently all that had faith
to believe that God would be as good as his word, began to look
for, and to expect that the Lord should accomplish and bring to
pass what he had promised, what his hand and counsel had before
determined to be done.

(1.) Now Abraham begins to look for what God had promised and
signified; namely, that he would send a Saviour into the world in
his appointed time, which thing being promised, Abraham embraces,
being persuaded of the certainty of it; as in Hebrews 11:13. And
this did fill his heart with joy and gladness, as I said before;
for 'he saw it, and was glad' (John 8:56).

(2.) Jacob also, while he was blessing his sons, concerning things
to come, breaks forth with these words, 'I have waited for thy
salvation' (Gen 49:18). He was also put in expectation of salvation
to come by this Saviour.

(3.) David was in earnest expectation of this, which was held
forth by types and shadows in the law; for as yet the Saviour was
not come, which made him cry out with a longing after it, 'O that
the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion' (Psa 53:6). And
again, 'O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion!'
(Psa 14:7). The thing that David waited for, was not in his time
come, though before his time it was promised; which makes him cry
out, O that it were come, that it were come out of Sion! Where,
by the way, take notice, that the true salvation and Saviour of
Israel was to come out of Sion, that is, out of the church of God,
touching the flesh, as it is written; A prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me (Deut
18:15,18). And again, 'I have laid help upon one that is mighty;
I have exalted one chosen out of the people' (Psa 89:19; Rom 9:5).
'Whoso are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever.' Christ, as concerning
the flesh, did come of the fathers.

(4.) Isaiah did prophesy of this, that God would thus save his
people; yea, he breaks forth with these words, 'But Israel shall
be saved in the LORD with an everlasting salvation' (Isa 45:17). He
also tells them how it shall be accomplished in that 53d chapter.
Yea, he had such a glorious taste of the reality of it, that he
speaks as though it had been actually done.

(5.) In the days of Jeremiah, this that God had promised to the
fathers, was not yet accomplished; in chapter 23:5 he saith,
'Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will [mark, it was
not yet done] but I will [saith God] raise unto David a righteous
branch, and a king shall reign and prosper.--In his days Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is his
name wherewith he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.'

(6.) He was also to come in Zechariah's time (Zech 3:8). Where he
saith 'for, behold, I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH.'

(7.) He was not come in the time of Malachi neither, though he
was indeed at that time near his coming. For he saith himself,
'Behold, I will send my messenger, [meaning John the baptist,]
and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord whom ye
seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of
the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold he shall come, saith the
Lord of hosts' (Mal 3:1; Isa 40:3; Luke 1:76).

(8.) Old Simeon did also wait for the consolation of Israel a
long time (Luke 2:25). Where it is said, 'And, behold, there was
a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same man was
just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel.' That is,
waiting for him that was to be the Saviour, as is clear, if you
read with understanding a little farther: 'And it was revealed
unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before
he had seen the Lord's Christ' (v 26).

And thus have I in brief shewed you, 1. That there is such a thing
as Christ. 2. That this Christ was promised and signified out
by many things before he did come. 3. How he was waited for, and
expected before the time that God had appointed in the which he
should come.

The SECOND THING that I will (through the strength of Christ)
prove, is this, THAT HE THAT WAS OF THE VIRGIN, IS HE THAT IS THE
SAVIOUR.

FIRST, And first, I shall lay down this for a truth; That it is not
any Spirit only by, and of itself, without it do take the nature
of man, that can be a Saviour of man from eternal vengeance.

Or thus: That that [which] will be a Saviour of man, must in the
nature of man satisfy and appease the justice and wrath of God.
And the arguments that I do bring to prove it by, are these.

First, Because it was man that had offended; and justice required
that man must give the satisfaction: And therefore, when he that
should be the Saviour, was come, he 'took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men' (Phil 2:7; Heb 2:14).
Because 'the children are partakers of flesh and blood; he also
himself likewise took part of the same'; To what end? 'that through
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the devil.' And is that all? No; but also that he might 'deliver
them who through fear of death, were all their lifetime subject
to bondage' (v 15).

Second, The second argument is this; because, if a spirit only
could have made satisfaction for the sin of mankind, and have
subdued Satan for man, without the nature of man, either there had
been weakness in Body when he made that promise to fallen Adam,
That the seed of the woman should break the serpent's head; (for
there hath been no need of and so no room for that promise) or
else God having made it, would have appeared unfaithful, in not
fulfilling his promise, by redeeming the world without it.

Third, If a spirit only could have made satisfaction, and so have
saved man; then Christ needed not to have come into the world, and
to have been born of a woman (Gal 4:4). But in that he must come
into the world, and must be born of a woman, it is clear, that
without this, he could not have been a Saviour: For he was made
of a woman, made under the law, to this end, that he might redeem
them that were under the law; implying, No subjection to this, (viz.
the taking of the nature of man) no redemption from the curse of
the law. But Christ hath delivered from the curse of the law (all
that believe in his name) being in their nature made a curse for
them.

And this is the reason, why the fallen angels are not recovered
from their damnable estate, because, he did not take hold of their
nature, 'For verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but
he took on him the seed of Abraham' (Heb 2:16).

SECOND, Now then, seeing this is the very truth of God, I shall
next prove, that Jesus that was born of the virgin, to be the
Saviour. And,

First, I shall prove it by comparing some places of the Old and New
testament together, and by some arguments drawn from the scriptures.

1. And first, see Genesis 3:15, where he is called the seed of
the woman, saying, 'I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed'; and so was Jesus (Gal 4:4)
where it is said, 'God sent forth his Son, made of a woman,' or
born of a woman.

2. This woman must be a virgin (Isa 7:14) where it is said, 'A
virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name
Imanuel.' And Jesus is he that was the fulfilling of this scripture
(Matt 1:22,23), 'Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a
virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they
shall call his name Imanuel.'

3. The Saviour must be of the tribe of Judah. And this Jacob
prophesied of on his death-bed, saying, 'Judah, thou art he whom
thy brethren shall praise,' or honour, 'thy hand shall be in the
neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before
thee' (Gen 49:8).

And again (Micah 5:2), 'But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou
be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he
come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel.' Jesus also came
of the tribe of Judah, and that will clearly appear, if you read
(Matt 1). Matthew, he begins first with Abraham (v 2) and thence
to Judah (v 3) from Judah to David (v 6) from David to Zorobabel
(v 13) then to Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary,
of whom was born Jesus (v 16).

Now Mary was one of the same house also, and for this consider,
Jesus came from the loins of David (Matt1); but that he could not
do, if Mary had not been of the seed of David: For Christ came from
her, not from him, for Joseph 'knew her not till she had brought
forth her first-born' (Matt 1:25). Again, the angel told her, that
he was the son of David, saying, 'And the Lord God shall give unto
him the throne of his father David' (Luke 1:32).

And again, The Jews knew this very well, or else they would have
been sure to have laid it open before all the world; for they
sought by all means to disown him. And though they did through the
devilishness of their unbelief disown him, yet could they find no
such thing as to question the right of his birth from Mary. If it
had been to be done, they would no doubt have done it; they did
not want malice to whet them on; neither did they want means so far
as might help forward their malice; without manifest and apparent
injury; for they had exact registers, or records of their genealogies,
so that, if they had had any colour for it, they would sure have
denied him to have been the son of David. There was reasoning
concerning him when he was with them (John 7:27,43) and I do
believe, part of it was about the generation of which he came.
And this was so commonly known, that the blind man that sat by
the way-side could cry out, 'Jesus thou Son of David, have mercy
on me.--Thou Son of David, have mercy on me' (Luke 18:38,39). It
was so common, that he came from the loins of his father David
according to the flesh, that it was not so much as once questioned.
'And when' Herod 'demanded of the chief priests and scribes of
the people where Christ should be born. They said unto him, in
Bethlehem of Judea: For thus it is written by the prophet, And
thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the
princes of Juda, for out of thee shall come a governor, that shall
rule my people Israel' (Matt 1:4-6). (For out of thee) mark that;
if Mary had not been of Judah, Christ had not come out of Judah,
but Christ came out of Judah; therefore Mary is also a daughter
of Judah. And this is evident, as saith the scripture, 'for--our
Lord sprang out of Judah' (Heb 7:14).

Again, when Christ the Saviour was to come into the world, at
that time the sceptre was to depart from Judah, according to the
prophecy of Jacob. 'The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor
a law-giver from between his feet, until Shiloh come' (Gen 49:10).

Now the sceptre was then departed from those that were Jews by
nature, and also the law-giver, and Herod who was a stranger, and
not of Judea, was king over them, as Caesar's deputy; and Caesar
Augustus imposed laws on them.

The stubborn Jews also confessed the sceptre to be departed, when
before Pontius Pilate a Roman governor of Judea, they cried out
against Christ: 'We have no king but Cesar' (John 19:15).

Nay farther, the Jews from that day to this, have been without a
king of their own nation to govern them: they never had the sceptre
swayed since by any of themselves, but have been a scattered
despised people, and have been as it were liable to all dangers,
and for a long time driven out from their country, and scattered
over all the nations of the earth, as was prophesied concerning
them (Jer 14:10; Zech 6:14,15). And yet these poor souls are so
horribly deluded by the devil, that though they see these things
come to pass, yet they will not believe. And one reason among
many, of their being thus deluded, is this, they say that the word
sceptre in Genesis 49 is not meant of a kingly government; but
the meaning is, (say they) a rod, or persecutions shall not depart
from Judah till Shiloh come. Now they do most grossly mistake
that place; for though I am not skilled in the Hebrew tongue,
yet through grace, I am enlightened into the scriptures; whereby
I find that the meaning is not persecutions, nor the rod of
afflictions, but a governor or sceptre of the kingdom shall not
depart from Judah till Shiloh come. And that this is the meaning
of the place, weigh but the very next words of the same verse,
and you will find it to be the sceptre of a king that is meant;
for he addeth, 'nor a law-giver from between his feet.' Mark it,
The sceptre, nor a law-giver; the legislative power depending on
the sceptre of the kingdom, shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh
come. According to that scripture, written in Isaiah 7:16, 'For
before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the
good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
kings.' Which scripture hath been fulfilled from that same time.

But a word to the Jews' exposition of the sceptre to be a rod,
or persecutions; saying, that persecutions shall not depart from
Judah till Shiloh come. This cannot be the meaning of the place;
for the Jews have had rest oftentimes, and that before Shiloh did
come; at one time they 'had rest four-score years' (Judg 3:30).
Again, 'And the land had rest from war' (Josh 14:15). And again,
'And the Lord gave them rest round about, according to all that he
sware unto their fathers, and there stood not a man of all their
enemies before them' (Josh 21:44). 'And the land had rest forty
years' (Judg 3:11). There was rest many a time from persecution
and from the rod, though it were but for a season; but the sceptre,
or kingdom, did not depart from Judah, and a law-giver from between
his feet till Shiloh came.

Second, Again, To prove that Jesus is the Christ, it is clear from
the hand of God against the Jews, for putting him to death. What
was the reason why they did put him to death, but this, He did
say that he was the Christ the Son of God? (Luke 22:70) 'Then said
they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye
say that I am.' That is, I am he as you say, I am the Son of God;
yea, the only begotten Son of the Father, and I was with him before
the world was (John 9:37, 17:5).

Now the Jews did put him to death for his thus owning his own;
that is, for not denying of his Sonship, but making himself equal
with God, therefore did they put him to death (John 19:7).

Now God did, and doth most miserably plague them to this very
day, for their crucifying of him: But I say, had he not been the
Christ of God, God's Son, he would not have laid sin to their
charge, for crucifying him; but rather have praised them for their
zeal, and for taking him out of the way, who did rob God of his
honour, in that he made himself equal with God, and was not. He
would have praised them for doing the thing that was right, as
he did Phineas the son of Eleazar, for executing judgment in his
time, on the adulterer and adulteress (Num 25:8).

But in that he said he was the Son of God, and accounted it no
robbery so to call himself (Phil 2:6). And seeing that they did
put him to death, because he said he was the Son of God; and in
that God doth so severely charge them with, and punish them for
their sin in putting him to death, for saying that he was the Son
of God, it is evident that he was and is the Son of God, and that
Saviour that should come into the world. For his blood hath been
upon them to this very day for their hurt, according to their
desire (Matt 27:25).

Again, Jesus himself doth in this day hold forth that he is the
Christ, where he saith, 'The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of
God is at hand' (Mark 1:15). What time is this that Jesus speaks
of? Surely, 'tis that of Daniel's seventy weeks, spoken of in
chapter 9:24 where he saith, 'Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people--to finish the transgression, and to make an end of
sins, and to make reconciliation' or satisfaction 'for iniquity,
and to bring in everlasting righteousness,--and to anoint the most
Holy.' This time, that here Daniel speaks of, is it that Christ
saith hath an end; and the argument that he brings to persuade them
to believe the gospel, is this, 'The kingdom of God is at hand,'
(according as was prophesied of it by Daniel) 'repent, and believe
the gospel.' Repent, and believe that this is the gospel; and that
this is the truth of God; consider, that Daniel had a revelation
of these days from the angel of God, and also the time in which it
should be accomplished: namely, Seventy weeks was the determined
time of the Messias his coming, from the time when the angel spake
these words to Daniel: Seventy weeks, that is, about 490 years, if
you reckon every day in the said seventy weeks for a year: A day
for a year, a day for a year; for so is the Holy Spirit's way
sometimes to reckon days (Eze 4:6). And this the Jews were convinced
of, when Christ saith to them, 'Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the
face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?'
(Matt 16:3). Do you not see that those things that are spoken
of as forerunners of my coming, are accomplished? Do you not see
that the sceptre is departed from Judah? Do you not see the time
that Daniel spake of is accomplished also? There shall no sign be
given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas: O ye hypocritical
generation! (v 4).

Third, Another argument to prove that Jesus is the Christ, is
this, By his power the blind see, the lame walk, the deaf hear, the
dumb speak, the dead are raised up, the devils are dispossessed.
In Isaiah 35:4 it is thus prophesied of him, 'Behold your God will
come with vengeance, even God with a recompense; he will come and
save you'; But how shall we know when he is come? Why, 'Then the
eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall
be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the
tongue of the dumb sing; for in the wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the desert' (vv 5,6). Now when John would
know whether he were the Christ or no, Jesus sends him this very
answer, 'Go, and shew John [saith he] again those things which
you do hear and see: the blind receive their sight, and the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are
raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them' (Matt
11:3-5).

Fourth, Another argument that doth prove this Jesus to be the
Christ, is this, namely, he to whom it was revealed, that he should
see him, though he waited long for him. So soon as ever he did but
see that sweet babe that twas born of the virgin Mary, he cried
out, 'Lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according
to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou
hast prepared before the face of all people'; as it is in Luke
2:26-31. The prophetess Anna also, so soon as she had seen him,
'gave thanks to the Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked
for redemption in Jerusalem' (vv 36-38).

Fifth, Another argument is, the sign of the prophet Jonah. He,
even Jonah, was three days and three nights in the whale's belly
(Jonah 1:17) and Jesus makes this very thing an argument to the
Jews, that he was the true Messias, where he saith, 'An evil and
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign'; that is, they would
have me to show them a sign, to prove that I am the Saviour, 'And
there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet
Jonah: For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's
belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth' (Matt 12:39,40). And this, the Apostle
makes mention of to be accomplished, where he says, The Jews slew
Jesus, and hanged him on a tree (Acts 10:39) and laid him in
a sepulchre (Matt 27). But God raised him up the third day, and
shewed him openly (Acts 10:40).

Sixth, Another scripture argument to prove that Jesus is the Christ,
is this, that there was not one of his bones broken; which thing
was foretold and typed out by the Paschal Lamb, where he saith,
'They shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone
of it' (Exo 12:46; Num 9:12), which thing was fulfilled in the Son
of the virgin, (though contrary to the customs of that nation,)
as it is written, 'Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of
the first, and of the other which was crucified with him. But when
they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they break
not his legs' (John 19:32,33): 'that the scripture should be
fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken' (v 36).

Seventh, Another scripture demonstration is, in that they did
fulfil the saying that was written, 'They part my garments among
them, and cast lots upon my vesture' (Psa 22:18). But this was
also fulfilled in Jesus, as it is written; 'Then the soldiers,
when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four
parts, to every soldier a part; and also his coat: now the coat was
without seam,--They said therefore among themselves, let us not
rend it, but cast lots for it whose it shall be: that the scripture
might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among
them, and for my vesture they did cast lots' (John 19:23,24).

Eighth, Again, The scripture saith, 'they shall look upon me, whom
they have pierced' (Zech 12:10). But the soldier thrust a spear
into his side, That it might be fulfilled which was written, 'they
shall look on him whom they pierced' (John 19:34-37).

Error 1. Now then, seeing this is the truth of God, that Jesus
that was born of the virgin, is the Christ of God; how horribly
are those deceived who look on Jesus the Son of Mary, to be but
a shadow or type, of something that was afterward to be revealed;
whereas the scriptures most lively hold him forth to be the Christ
of God, and not a shadow of a spirit, or of a body afterwards
to be revealed, but himself was the very substance of all things
that did any way type out Christ to come; and when he was indeed
come, then was an end put to the law for righteousness, or
justification to every one that believeth; 'Christ is the end
of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth,' as it
is written (Rom 10:4). That is, he was the end of the ceremonial
law, and of that commonly called the moral law, the substance of
which is laid down (Exo 20:1-17) though that law, as handed out
by Christ, still remains of great use to all believers, which
they are bound to keep for sanctification, as Christ saith (Matt
5:19 to the end of the chapter). But Christ Jesus hath obtained
everlasting righteousness, having fulfilled all the law of God
in the body of his flesh, wherein he also suffered on the cross
without the gates, and doth impute this righteousness to poor man,
having accomplished it for him in the body of his flesh, which
he took of the virgin (Gal 4:4). 'God sent forth his Son, made of
a woman, [that is, born of the virgin] made under the law,' that
is, to obey it, and to bear the curse of it, 'being made a curse
for us' (Gal 3:13); to redeem them that were under the law, that
is, to redeem such as were ordained to life eternal, from the curse
of the law. And this he did by his birth, being made or born of a
woman; by his obedience, yea, by his perfect obedience 'he became
the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him' (Heb
5:8,9); and by his doing and suffering, did completely satisfy
the law and the justice of God, and bring in that glorious and
everlasting salvation, without which we had all eternally been
undone, and that without remedy; for without shedding of his blood
there was no remission.

Error 2. Seeing Jesus Christ, the Son of the virgin Mary, was and
is the Christ of God: and that salvation came in alone by him, for
there is salvation in no other (Acts 4:12), then how are they
deceived, that think to obtain salvation by following the convictions
of the law, which they call Christ (though falsely) when alas,
let them follow those convictions that do come from the law,
and conscience set on work by it; I say, let them follow all the
convictions that may be hinted in upon their spirits from that law,
they shall never be able to obtain salvation by their obedience
to it, 'for by the law is the knowledge of sin' (Rom 3:20; Gal
3:10; John 10:15; Heb 9:12). And 'It is not of works lest any man
should boast,' as those fond hypocrites called Quakers would do.
And again, 'If righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead
in vain' (Gal 2:21). 'But that no man is justified by the works of
the law, in the sight of God, it is evident: for, The just shall
live by faith' (Gal 3:11). Which living by faith, is to apply the
Lord Jesus Christ his benefits, as birth, righteousness, death,
blood, resurrection, ascension, and intercession, with the glorious
benefits of his second coming to me, as mine, being given to me,
and for me, and thus much doth the Apostle signify, saying; 'The
life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me' (Gal 2:20).

Error 3. Again, Seeing God's Christ, which was with him before
the world was (John 17:5) took upon him flesh and blood from the
virgin Mary, (who was espoused to Joseph the carpenter) and in
that human nature yielded himself an offering for sin, (for it
was the body of his flesh by which sin was purged [Col 1:22]). I
say, seeing the Son of God, as he was in a body of flesh, did bring
in salvation for sinners, and by this means, as I said before, we
are saved, even by faith in his blood, righteousness, resurrections,
&c. How are they then deceived who own Christ no otherwise than
as he was before the world began, who was then without flesh and
blood (for he took that in time of the virgin [Gal 4:4; Heb 2:14]).
I say, they are wickedly deluded, who own him no otherwise but as
he was before the world was: For in their owning of him thus and
no otherwise, they do directly deny him to be come in the flesh,
and are of that antichristian party which John speaks of (1 John
4:3) 'Every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist,
whereof ye have heard that it should come, and even now already
is it in the world.' Now because the enemy doth most notably wrest
this scripture, as they do others, to their own damnation, I
shall speak something to it; and therefore, when he saith, every
spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
is not of God, his meaning is, Every spirit that doth not confess
that that Christ that was with the Father before the world was, did
in the appointed time of the Father come into the world, took on
him a body from the virgin, and was very man as well as very God,
and in that body of flesh did do and suffer whatsoever belonged
to the sons of men for the breach of the holy law of God, and
impute his glorious righteousness which he fulfilled in that body
of his flesh, to the souls that shall believe on what he hath
done, and is adoing in the same body.

Consider 1. And that this is the mind of the Spirit of God, consider,
first, he himself saith, handle me and see, for a spirit hath not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have, when his disciples had thought
he had been but a spirit (Luke 24:39,40).

Consider 2. Now that in this flesh he died for sins: consider,
secondly, that scripture which saith, 'Who his own self, [that
is, the Christ that was born of the Virgin] bare our sins in his
own body on the tree' (1 Peter 2:24). See Colossians 1:22 'in the
body of his flesh,' saith he, 'to present you holy and unblameable,
and unreprovable in his sight.' Now that he arose again from the
dead, with the body of flesh wherewith he was crucified, consider, that
forenamed scripture (Luke 24:39,40) spoken after his resurrection.

Now that he went away with the same body from them into heaven,
consider that it is said, 'And he led them out as far as to Bethany,
and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass,
while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up
into heaven' (Luke 24:50,51). This is the meaning of those words
therefore; Jesus Christ is come into the flesh, that is, Jesus
Christ hath come in the flesh that he took of the Virgin, hath
brought us who were enthralled to the law, the devil, and sin,
to liberty; and that by his obedience and death. 'Forasmuch then
as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, [saith the
scripture] he, [Christ] also himself likewise took part of the
same'; wherefore? 'That through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them who
through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage'
(Heb 2:14,15). For he 'was delivered for our offences, and was
raised again for our justification' (Rom 4:25). For he, even that
man, through the power of the eternal Spirit, did offer up himself
without spot to God, and thereby, or by that offering, 'obtained
eternal redemption for us' (Heb 9:12,14). And therefore I say again
and again, look to yourselves, that you receive no Christ except
God's Christ: For he is like to be deceived that will believe every
thing that calls itself a Christ. 'For many, [saith he] shall come
in my name,--and shall deceive many' (Matt 24:5).

Now having spoken thus much touching the Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ, I shall, according to the assistance of the Lord Jesus,
proceed, and shall speak something of his godhead, birth, death,
resurrection, ascension, and intercession; together with his most
glorious and personal appearing the second time, which will be to
raise the dead, and bring every work to judgment (Eccl 12:14).

And FIRST I shall shew you that he (Christ) is very God, co-eternal,
and also co-equal with his Father. SECOND, That by this Son of
Mary (which is equal with his Father) the world was made. THIRD,
That he in the fulness of time, was made of a woman, made under
the law, to redeem them that were (or are) under the law; that
is, was born of a woman: and in our nature (for he made himself
of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men) and in our stead he did fulfil the
law in point of justification (Rom 10:4) and was crucified for our
transgressions (1 Cor 1:23-25). FOURTH, That very body of the Son
of Mary which was crucified, did rise again from the dead, after
he had been buried in Joseph's sepulchre; that he in that very
body ascended up into heaven; and in that very body shall come
again to these ends, 1. To judge the quick and the dead. 2. To
receive his saints to himself. 3. To pass eternal condemnation on
his enemies. These things in brief I shall touch upon, according
to the wisdom given me.

FIRST, And therefore that Christ is very God, I shall first prove
by plain texts of scripture. Second, From the testimony of God,
angels, and men, witnessed by the scriptures. Third, By several
arguments drawn from scripture, which will prove the same clearly.

First, Then to prove it by the scriptures; tho' indeed the whole
book of God's holy scripture, testify these things plainly to be
most true, yet there be some places more pregnant and pertinent
to the thing than others; and therefore I shall mention some of
them: as that in Proverbs 8:22, &c. and there you shall find him
spoken of under the name of wisdom, the same name that is given
him in 1 Corinthians 1:24. I say in that place of the Proverbs
above mentioned, you shall find these expressions from his own
mouth. 'The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before
his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning,
or ever the earth was. When there were no depths, I was brought
forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water. Before
the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth:
While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor
the highest part of the dust of the world. When he prepared the
heavens, I was there: when he set a compass upon the face of the
depth: When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened
the fountains of the deep: When he gave to the sea his decree,
that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed
the foundations of the earth: Then I was by him, as one brought
up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before
him; rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights
were with the sons of men.' Also in John 1:1, 2 you have these words
spoken of Christ, 'In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning
with God.' As also in Hebrews 1:2 the Apostle being about to prove
the Son of Mary to be very God, saith; He 'hath in these last
days spoken unto us by his Son'; which Son is the Son of Mary,
as in Matthew 3, 'But [saith the Apostle (Heb 1:8)] unto the Son
he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a sceptre of
righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom.' Again, in John 17:5
you have the words of the Son of Mary for it, saying, 'And now, O
Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which
I had with thee before the world was.' Again, he himself saith,
before Abraham was, I am: And again, I and my Father are one. And
in Philippians 2:5 the Apostle saith, 'Let this mind be in you
which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men.' Also Revelation 2:8 Christ himself
saith, I am 'the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive.'
And thus have I quoted some few scriptures to prove that the Son
of Mary is the true God.

Second, I shall give you the testimony of God himself touching
the truth of this, viz. That Christ, the Son of the Virgin, is
the true God:

1. And first see Zechariah 12:7 and there you shall find these
words, 'Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man
that is my fellow, saith the Lord of hosts.' In this place the
Lord doth call that Man his fellow, which he doth not do to any
mere creature. Again, in Matthew 3:17 he calls him his beloved
Son, saying, 'This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.'
And in the aforesaid place of the Hebrews (ch 1) the Apostle advancing
the Lord Jesus, brings in this question. 'To which of the angels
said he at any time, Thou art my Son?' (v 5). 'But unto the Son he
saith' (v 8) 'Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever': And thus
far of the testimony that God himself hath given of the Son of
Mary, Jesus Christ.

2. The angels do shew that he is God: (1.) In that they do obey
him. (2.) In that they worship him.

(1.) That they obey him, is clear, if we compare Revelation 21:9
with 22:6. In the first of these places we find, that there came
one of the angels of the seven vials, which had the seven last
plagues, and talked with John. He came not of himself; for in that
22nd chapter, verse 6 he saith, 'The Lord--sent his angel to shew
unto his servants, the things which must shortly be done.' Now in
the 16th verse you may see who this Lord God is: He saith there,
'I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify--these things in the
churches [compare Rev 1:1]. I am the root and [as well as] the
offspring of David, and the bright and morning star.' I say this
obedience of the angels doth testify that Jesus, which is the Son
of Mary, is the true and very God; for they do obey God only.

(2.) The angels do shew that the Son of Mary, is the true God,
in that they do not only obey him, but worship him also; yea,
they are commanded so to do (Heb 1:6) where it is written, 'When
he bringeth in the first begotten into the world, he [i.e. God,]
saith, And let all the angels of God worship him,' viz. the Son of
Mary. Now the angels themselves command that we worship none but
God (Rev 22:8,9). When John fell down to worship the angel, the angel
said, 'See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servant,--worship
God.' Now if the angels should command to worship God, and they
themselves should worship him that by nature is no god, they should
overthrow themselves, in commanding one thing, and doing another,
and so lose their own habitations, and be shut up in chains of
darkness, to be punished with everlasting destruction from God
himself at the great day. And thus much concerning the testimony
of angels touching Jesus the son of Mary, the Son of God, yea,
very and true God (Isa 9:6).

3. [The testimony of men witnessed by the scriptures do shew that
Christ is very God.] Now followeth David his testimony among other
of the saints, who witness Jesus the Son of Mary to be true God;
and that you may find in Psalm 110:1 where he saith, 'The LORD
said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.' Also Isaiah in the 9th chapter, verse 6
saith, 'For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and
the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall
be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and
peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, [which is
not, nor ever was the heart of any believer] and upon his kingdom,
to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice
from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will
perform this.' Again, see Peter's testimony of this Son of Mary;
When Jesus asked his disciples, whom say ye that I am? Peter,
as the mouth of the rest, said, 'Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God' (Matt 16:16). Also when Thomas, one of Christ's
disciples, would not be persuaded by the others that they had
seen the Lord, except he did also see in his hands the print of
the nails, and put his fingers into the print of the nails, and
thrust his hand into his side, he would not believe. Saith the
Son of Mary, 'Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side; and be not
faithless but believing.' And then Thomas breaks out with a mighty
faith, and a glorious testimony for his master, and saith, 'My
Lord, and my God' (John 20:27,28). Again, See Paul's testimony of
him (Rom 9:5) where speaking of the Son of Mary, he saith, That
Christ came of the Father, 'who is over all, God blessed for ever,
Amen.' And the apostle John doth also witness as much (1 John 5:20)
where speaking of Jesus Christ, he saith on this wise, 'And we know
that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding,
that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true,
[Who is that? why, saith John] even in his Son Jesus Christ.' Who
is he? Why, 'This is the true God, and eternal life.'

I could here also bring in the testimony of the very devils
themselves as Luke 4:41, 8:28 where he is by them acknowledged to
be the Son of the living God: But it is needless so to do; for we
have plainly proved it already.

Third, Now followeth the several scripture arguments, which will
prove that Jesus the Son of Mary is very God.

1. There is none but he that is the true God, can satisfy the
justice of the true God, for the breach of his holy law; but if
you compare Isaiah 53:6 with Matthew 3:17 you shall find, that
Jesus the Son of Mary did give God a full and complete satisfaction
for the breach of his holy law; therefore Jesus the Son of Mary
must needs be the great and true God.

2. He that hath power of his own to lay down his life, and hath
power of his own to take it up again, must needs be the true God:
but this did Jesus the Son of Mary the virgin; therefore he must
needs be the true God (John 10:17; Rom 1:4).

3. There was never any able to bear the sins of all the believers
in the world, that ever were, now are, or hereafter shall be,
but the true God: But Jesus, the Son of the Virgin Mary, did bear
them all, 'in his own body on the tree' (1 Peter 2:24; Isa 53:6).
Therefore Jesus the Son of Mary must needs be the true God as well
as man.

4. There was never any mere man able, by his own power, to overcome
the devil in all his temptations, but he that is also the true
God (for Adam in his state of innocency was overcome by them, and
fell under them:) But Jesus the Son of the Virgin did overcome
them all by his own power; therefore he is very God, as well as
very Man. See Genesis 3:15; Isaiah 51:9, 63:5; Matthew 4:24; Luke
4:12.

5. There was never any that did call himself the true God (and was
not) which did please God in so doing. But Jesus the Son of Mary
did call himself the true God, or account himself equal with God
(which is all one) yet God was well pleased with him (Matt 3:17;
Phil 2:6,7; John 8:29). And therefore Jesus the Son of Mary must
needs be true God as well as man.

6. There was never any that had all power in heaven and in earth, but
the true God. Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, who was espoused
to Joseph, hath all power in heaven and in earth in his own hand.
Therefore he is the true and great God (Matt 28:18).

7. There was never any able to keep poor souls from falling from
God, saving he that is the true God. Jesus the Son of Mary did,
and doth this (John 10:27-30, 17:12). Therefore he is the true
and great God.

8. Never could any justly call himself the first and the last,
except the true God, nor truly (as the Lord did say) I AM. But
these did Jesus the Son of Mary (Rev 1:1 compared with vv 17,18;
Rev 2:8 and John 8:58). Therefore Jesus must needs be true God as
well as man.

9. Never was there any that could absolutely forgive sins but God
(Mark 2:7; Luke 5:21). But Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, can
forgive sins (Luke 5:20; Mark 2:5). Therefore Jesus the Son of
Mary must needs be true God, as well as man.

10. The scriptures never call any the true and living God; but he
that is the true God. The scriptures call Jesus, the Son of the
Virgin, the true God (Isa 9:6; 1 John 5:20). Therefore he is the
true and great God.

11. He that made all things, whether they be visible, or invisible,
whether they be thrones or dominions, or principalities, or powers,
must needs be the true God. But Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary
did make all these (Col 1:14-18; John 1:1-16; Heb 1:2,3). And
therefore he is the true God as well as man.

12. The blood of a mere finite creature could never obtain eternal
redemption for sinners. But the blood of Jesus, the Son of the
Virgin Mary, hath obtained eternal redemption for sinners (Rom
3:23, 5:9; Heb 9:12,14, 10:19,20). Therefore the blood of the Son
of the Virgin, must needs be the blood of God. And so the Apostle
calleth it, saying to the pastors of the churches, 'Feed the church
of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood' (Acts 20:28;
1 John 3:16).

13. Never was there any that could overcome death in his own power,
but the true God (Hosea 13:14; 2 Tim 1:10; Heb 1:2). Jesus the
Son of the Virgin Mary did overcome death by himself (Heb 3:14).
Therefore he is the true God as well as man.

14. He that searcheth the hearts, and knoweth the thoughts of men,
must needs be the true God (Jer 17:10). But Jesus the Son of the
Virgin doth (Luke 5:22, 9:47; John 2:24,25). Therefore he is the
true God.

15. He that by his own power commandeth the raging sea, must needs
be the true God (Job 38:10,11; Prov 8:29). But this did Jesus the
Son of Mary (Mark 4:39-41; Luke 8:24). Therefore, he is the true
God.

16. He that is the WISDOM, power, and glory of God, must needs
be the true God. But Jesus the Son of the Virgin is all these as
1 Corinthians 1:24; Hebrews 1:3. Therefore Jesus the Son of the
Virgin must needs be true God as well as man.

SECOND.--The next thing that I am to prove, is this; namely, That
by this Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin, the world was made:
And here I shall be brief, having touched on it already. Only
I shall lay down some of the scriptures, that hold forth this to
be a truth, and so pass to the next things that I intend to speak
of.

And therefore in the first place, see Hebrews 1:2 where the Apostle
is speaking of the Son of God, which Son was born of the Virgin
Mary, according to these scriptures mentioned before (Matt 1:18-23;
Luke 2; Matt 3:17) where God himself saith, This is my beloved
Son, &c. This Son of God, saith the Apostle, by whom God hath
spoken to us, by him also he made the worlds. And Colossians
1 the Apostle speaking of the deliverance of the saints, saith,
'who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated
us into the kingdom of his dear Son: In whom we have redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins': And is that all?
No, but he is (also) 'the image of the invisible God, the first
born of every creature' (v 15). And in verses 16, 17, 'By him
were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for
him: And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.'
Also Hebrews 1:10 it is thus written of this Son of God, Christ
Jesus the Son of Mary, 'And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast
laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the works
of thine hands.' And again, John 1 and the first 9 verses, the
Evangelist, or Apostle, speaking of the Son, saith, 'In the beginning
was the Word,' which Word was the Son (Rev 19:13). This Word, or
Son, was with God, and the Word was God. All things were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. 'In
him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light
shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.' But
in the ninth verse of this first chapter of John, it is written,
'That was the true light, which lighteth every man that cometh
into the world.' Now seeing the Lord hath brought me thus far;
and because the Quakers by wresting this scripture, do not only
split themselves upon it, but endeavour also to split others, I
shall therefore, before I proceed any further, speak a few words
to it; and they are these that follow.

The Apostle in these nine first verses, or most of them, is speaking
of the divinity or godhead of the Son of Mary, and shewing that
he made the world: Now in this ninth verse he speaketh of man as
he is in his coming into the world, and not as he is a regenerate
person. Now every man as he comes into the world, receives a light
from Christ, as he is God, which light is the conscience, that
some call Christ though falsely. This light, or conscience, will
shew a man that there is a God, and that this God is eternal (Rom
1:20). This light doth discover this eternal God by his works in
the world; for saith the scripture before named, 'The invisible
things of him [meaning God] from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and godhead'; This light also will reprove of
sin, or convince of, and make manifest sins against the law of
this eternal God: so that man, before he is regenerate, is able
by that light to know that sins against the law, are sins against
God, as is manifested in the unconverted Pharisees, who, (as
Christ told them) had neither the love of God, nor the word of God
abiding in them (John 5:38,42) yet knew sins against the law, to
be sins; for they were offended at a woman for committing adultery,
which act was forbidden, by the law (Matt 5:27,28); and it is said
also, they were convicted of sin by their own consciences (John
8:7-10).

Again, The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, and admonishing
them to walk orderly (1 Cor 11:14) turns them to nature itself,
saying, 'Doth not even nature itself teach you?' &c. This light
surely is that, wherewith Christ, as he is God, hath enlightened
every man that cometh into the world, which doth convince of
sins against the law of God. Therefore, as the Apostle saith (Rom
1:20). They are left without excuse. That is, they have their own
conscience, that doth shew them there is a God, and that this God
is to be served and obeyed; and the neglect of this will be sure
to damn them, though the obedience to the law will not save them,
because they are not able to make a full recompense to God for the
sins that are past; neither are they able for the time to come,
to yield a full, continual, and complete obedience to the law
of this almighty, infinite, and eternal God. For as many as are
of the works of the law, are under the curse; for it is written,
'Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them. But that no man is
justified by the [works of the] law,--it is evident: for, The just
shall live by faith' (Gal 3:10,11).

But now, though Christ, as he is God, doth give a light to every
one that cometh into the world, which light is the conscience, (as
they themselves confess;) yet it doth not therefore follow that
this conscience is the Spirit of Christ, or the work of grace,
wrought in the heart of any man whatsoever; for every one hath
conscience, yet every one hath not the Spirit of Christ: For Jude
speaks of a company of men in his days, who had not the Spirit of
Christ (Jude 19). 'These be they who separate themselves, [saith
he] sensual, having not the spirit.' Yea, Heathens, Turks, Jews,
Pagans, Atheists, have that also that doth convince of sin, and
yet are so far from having the Spirit of Christ in them, that it
is their great delight to serve their lusts, this world, their sins;
whereas the Apostle saith plainly, 'If Christ be in you, the body
is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life for righteousness
sake' (Rom 8:10)[1] So that those who are alive to their sins, have
not the Spirit of Christ. Nay, let me tell you, the very devils
themselves, who were thrown from their first state by sin (Jude 6)
have such a taste of their horrible sins (2 Peter 2:4) that when
they did but suppose that Jesus was come to put an end to their
tyrannical dealing with the world, and to bring them to judgment
for their sins, (to which they know they shall be brought,) it
made them cry out, 'Art thou come hither to torment us before the
time?' (Matt 8:29). James doth also signify this much unto us,
where he saith, 'The devils also believe and tremble' (James 2:19).
Which belief of theirs is not a believing in Christ to save them;
for they know he did not take hold on their nature (Heb 2:16).
But they do believe that Christ will come to their everlasting
torment; and the belief of this doth make these proud spirits to
tremble.

Again, Man at his coming into the world, hath his conscience given
him, which doth convince of sin (John 2:9, 8:9), yet man, as he
cometh into the world, hath not the Spirit of Christ in him; for
that must be received afterward, by the preaching of the word,
which is preached by the ministers and servants of Jesus Christ.
This is God's usual way to communicate of his Spirit into the
hearts of his elect; and this is clear in so many words, where
Peter preaching to a certain number, the scripture saith, 'While
Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost, [or Holy Spirit,]
fell on all them which heard the word' (Acts 10:44). And again (Gal
3:2,5 compared together), 'Received ye the Spirit by the works of
the law, [saith the Apostle] or by the hearing of faith?' or the
Gospel, which is the word of faith preached by us? Which Spirit,
as Christ saith, the world cannot receive, because it seeth him
not, neither knoweth him, though his children shall have fellowship
with him to the great comfort of their own souls (John 14:16,17).

But now, this merciless butcherer of men, the devil, that he
might be sure to make the soul fall short of glory, if possible,
endeavours to persuade the soul that its state is good; that
it hath the Spirit of Christ in it; and for a proof of the same,
saith he, turn thy mind inward, and listen within, and see if
there be not that within thee that doth convince of sin: Now the
poor soul; finding this to be so, all on haste (if it be willing
to profess) through ignorance of the Gospel, claps in with these
motions of its own conscience, which doth command to abstain from
this evil, and to practise that good; which, if neglected, will
accuse and torment for the same neglect of others, both now and
hereafter (Rom 2:15).

Now the soul seeing that there is something within that convinceth
of sin, doth all on a sudden close with that, supposing it is the
Spirit of Christ, and so through this mistake, is carried away
with the teachings and convictions of its own conscience, (being
misinformed by the devil) unto the works of the law; under which,
though it work all its days, and labour with its might and main,
yet it never will be able to appease the wrath of God, nor get
from under the curse of the law, nor get from under the guilt of
one sinful thought the right way, which is to be done by believing
what another man hath done by himself, without us, on the cross,
without the gates of Jerusalem (Heb 1:2,3; Rom 5:15). See also
for this 1 Peter 2:24; Hebrews 13:12. The one saith, He bare our
sins in his own body on the tree; the other saith, It was done
without the gate.

And thus the poor soul is most horribly carried away headlong, and
thrown down violently under the curse of the law, under which it
is held all its days, if God of his mere mercy prevent not; and
at the end of its life doth fall into the very belly of hell.

Again, That the devil might be sure to carry on his design, he now
begins to counterfeit the work of grace: here he is very subtle,
and doth transform himself into an angel of light (2 Cor 11:14).
Now he makes the soul believe that he is its friend, and that he
is a gospel minister; and if the soul will be led by what shall be
made known unto it by the light (or conscience) within, it shall
not need to fear but it shall do well.

Now he counterfeits the new birth, persuading them, that it is
wrought by following the light that they brought into the world
with them. Now he begins also to make them run through difficulties:
and now, like Baal's priests, they must lance themselves with knives,
&c. Now, 1656, quakers are changed to the laws of the world. Now
they must wear no hatbands; now they must live with bread and
water; now they must give heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines
of devils, which bids them abstain from marriage, and commands
them to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received
with thanksgiving, of them which love and know the truth, as in 1
Timothy 4:1-3. Now they must not speak, except their spirit moves
them, (I do not say the Spirit of Christ) though when it moves,
they will speak such sad blasphemies, and vent such horrible
doctrines, that it makes me wonder to see the patience of God,
in that he doth not command, either the ground to open her mouth,
and swallow them up, or else suffer the devil to fetch them away
alive, to the astonishment of the whole world.

Object. But you will say, doth not the scripture say, that it is
the Spirit of Christ that doth make manifest or convince of sin?
(John 16:8).

Ans. Yes, it doth so. But for the better understanding of this
place, I shall lay down this; namely, That there are two things
spoken of in the scriptures, which do manifest sin, or convince of
sin. First, The law, as saith the Apostle (Rom 3:20). 'Therefore
by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his
sight: [viz., God's sight:] for by the law is the knowledge of sin.'
Secondly, The Spirit of Christ doth make manifest, or reprove of
sin, as it is written (John 16:8,9). 'And when he [the Spirit] is
come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and
of judgment: Of sin, because they believe not on me'; saith the
Son of Mary, which is Christ.

Now the law doth sometimes by its own power manifest sin without
the Spirit of Christ; as in the case of Judas, who was convinced
of the sin of murder, which made him cry out, 'I have sinned';
yet at that time he was so far from having the Spirit of Christ
in him, that he was most violently possessed of the devil (Luke
22:3,4).

Again, Sometimes the Spirit of Christ takes the law, and doth
effectually convince of sin, of righteousness, and judgment to
come.

Query. But you will say, How should I know whether I am convinced
by the law alone, or that the law is set home effectually by the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus upon my conscience?

Ans. 1. Unto this I answer. First, When the law doth convince by
its own power, without the help of the Spirit of Christ, it doth
only convince of sins against the law, as of swearing, lying,
stealing, murdering, adultery, covetousness, and the like. I say,
it doth only make manifest sins against the law, pronouncing a
horrible curse, against thee, if thou fulfil it not, and so leaves
thee; but it gives thee no strength to fulfil it completely, and
continually, (which thou must do, if thou wilt be saved thereby).
Now thy own strength being insufficient for these things, having
lost it in Adam, thou art a breaker of the law. Here the law finds
thee in thy sins, and condemns thee for thy sins: But gives thee
no power to come wholly out of them; neither doth it shew thee
thy right Saviour, to save thee from them (which is the Son of the
Virgin Mary, the man Christ Jesus) but commands thee upon pain of
eternal damnation, to continue in all things that are written in
the book of the law to do them (Gal 3:10). And therefore if thou
hast been convinced of no other sins, but what are against the law,
for all thy convictions and horror of conscience, thou mayest be
but a natural man, at the best, and so under the curse.

(Obj.) But, perhaps thou wilt say, I am not only convinced of my
sins against the law, but I have also some power against my sins,
so that I do in some considerable measure abstain from those things
that are forbidden in the law.

(Ans.) This thou mayest have, and do, as thou thinkest, perfectly,
as those blind Pharisees called quakers, do think that they also
do, and yet be but a natural man: And therefore I pray consider
that place, in Romans 2:14, 15, the Apostle there speaks on this
wise, concerning the Gentiles' obedience to the law, 'For when
the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto
themselves: Which shew the work of the law written in their hearts.'
Which work of the law, Christ as he is God, hath enlightened
every one withal, that cometh into the world (John 1:9), which, as
the quakers say, doth convince of sin, yet of no other than sins
against the law: and therefore must needs be all one light or
law; for 'the law is light' (Prov 6:23) and gives 'the knowledge
of sin' (Rom 3:20). And therefore, as I said before, so say I now
again, if thy convictions are no other than for the sins against
the law, though thy obedience be the strictest that ever was
wrought by any man, (except the Lord Jesus the Son of Mary) thou
art at the best but under the law, and so consequently under the
curse, and under the wrath of God, whether thou believest it or
not (Gal 3:10; John 3:36).

Ans. 2. But now the second thing, how thou shouldest know, whether
the Spirit of Christ doth effectually set home the law upon thy
conscience, or not; and therefore to speak directly to it, if the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus, the Son of God, doth set home the law
effectually; then the same Spirit of Christ shews thee more sin
than the sins against the law. For,

(1.) It shews thee, that 'all our righteousnesses are as filthy
rags' (Isa 64:6). Thou seest all thy praying, meditation, hearing,
reading, alms-deeds, fasting, reformation, and whatsoever else
thou hast done, doest, or canst do, being an unbeliever, deserves
at the hands of God his curse and condemnation, and that for ever:
And therefore thou art so far from trusting to it, that in some
measure thou even loathest it, and art ashamed of it, as being a
thing abominable, both in God's sight and thine own (Phil 3:8).
Thou countest thy own performances, when at best, and thine
own righteousness, A bed too short to stretch thyself upon, and
a covering too narrow to wrap thyself in (Isa 28:20). And these
things thou seest not[2] overly, or slightly, and as at a great
distance, but really and seriously, and the sense of them sticks
close unto thee.

(2.) It shews thee that thou hast no faith in the man Christ Jesus
by nature, and that though thou hadst no other sins, yet thou art
in a perishing state because of unbelief, according to that 16th
of John, verse 9, 'Of sin, because they believe not on me.' If
therefore thou hast been convinced aright by the Spirit, thou hast
seen that thou hadst no faith in Christ the Son of Mary, the Son
of God, before conversion. It shews thee also, that thou canst
not believe in thine own strength, though thou wouldest never so
willingly; yea, though thou wouldest give all the world (if thou
hadst it) to believe, thou couldest not.

(3.) In the next place it will shew thee, that if thou doest not
believe in the man Christ Jesus, and that with 'the faith of the
operation of God' (Col 2:12), thou wilt surely perish, and that
without remedy; Also it shews thee, that if thou hast not that
righteousness, which the man Christ Jesus accomplished in his
own person for sinners; I say, if thou be not clothed with that
instead of thine own, thou art gone for ever; and therefore saith
Christ, (speaking of the Spirit) 'When he is come he will reprove
the world of sin, and of righteousness' too (John 16:8). That is,
the Spirit shall convince men and women of the sufficiency of that
righteousness that Christ, in his human nature, hath fulfilled: So
that they need not run to the law for righteousness: 'For Christ
is the end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believeth'
(Rom 10:4). Again, if the Spirit of Jesus setteth home the law
upon thy conscience, thou wilt freely confess, that although the
law curseth, and condemneth thee for thy sins, and gives thee no
power either to fulfil it, or to come out of thy sins: Yet God is
just in giving that law, and 'the law is holy, and the commandment
holy, and just, and good' (Rom 7:12).

(4.) Lastly, It also convinceth of judgment to come: He (viz. the
Spirit) shall reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, yea, and
of judgment too (Acts 24:25). Then doth the soul see, that that
very man that was born of the Virgin Mary, crucified upon the
cross without the gates of Jerusalem, shall so come again; even
that same Jesus, in like manner as he was seen to go up from his
disciples (Acts 1:11). Yea, they that are thus convinced by the
Spirit of Christ, know that God 'hath appointed a day, in the
which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom
he hath ordained' (Acts 17:31): which is the man Christ Jesus:
For 'it is he which was ordained of God to be the judge of quick
and dead' (Acts 10:42).

And now, O man, or woman, whoever thou art, that art savingly
convinced by the Spirit of Christ, thou hast such an endless desire
after the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou canst not be satisfied or
content with anything below the blood of the Son of God to purge
thy conscience withal; even that blood that was shed without the
gate (Heb 13:12, 9:14). Also thou canst not be at quiet, till thou
dost see by true faith, that the righteousness of the Son of Mary
is imputed unto thee, and put upon thee (Rom 3:21-23). Then also
thou canst not be at quiet, till thou hast power over thy lusts,
and corruptions, till thou hast brought them into subjection to
the Lord Jesus Christ. Then thou wilt never think that thou hast
enough faith. No, thou wilt be often crying out, Lord, give me
more precious faith: Lord, more faith in thy righteousness; more
faith in thy blood and death; more faith in thy resurrection:
And Lord, more faith in this, that thou art now at the right hand
of thy father in thy human nature, making intercession for me a
miserable sinner (John 16:5-7; 1 Tim 2:5; Heb 7:24,25). And then,
O poor soul, if thou comest but hither, thou wilt never have an
itching ear after another gospel. Nay, thou wilt say, if a presbyter,
or anabaptist, or independent, or ranter, or quaker, or papist,
or pope, or an angel from heaven, preach any other doctrine, let
him be accursed, again and again (Gal 1:8). And thus have I briefly
shewed you.

First, How Christ, as he is God, doth enlighten every man that
comes into the world.

Secondly, What this light will do, viz. shew them that there is
a God, by the things that are made; and that this God must be
worshiped (Rom 1:20).

Thirdly, I have shewed you the difference between that light and
the Spirit of Christ the Saviour.

Fourthly, I have also shewed you, how you should know the one from
the other, by their several effects.

The first light convinces of sins, but of none other than sins
against the law; neither doth it shew the soul a Saviour, or deliver
(for that is the work of the Spirit) from the curse wherewith it
doth curse it. But I shewed you, that when the Spirit of Christ
comes and works effectually, it doth not only shew men their sins
against the law, but also shews them their lost condition, if they
believe not in the righteousness, blood, death, resurrection, and
intercession of Jesus Christ, the Son of Mary, the Son of God
(John 6:44, 16:24; Matt 3:17; Heb 1:9). And thus much I thought
necessary to be spoken at this time, touching the nature of
conviction.

THIRD. Now in the third Place. Though I have spoken something to
this thing already, namely, concerning our Lord the Saviour, yet
again, in few words, through grace, I shall shew, that he was made,
that is, born of a woman, and made under the law, to redeem them
that are under the law. My meaning is, That God is our Saviour.

First, And for this, see Isaiah 45:15 where you have these words,
'Verily, thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the
Saviour': And verse 21, 22 you have these words, 'Who hath declared
this from ancient time?--Have not I the LORD? And there is no God
else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside
me. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth':
Why, who art thou? 'For I am God, and there is none else.' Also
in Isaiah 54:5 'For thy Maker is thine husband; the LORD of hosts
is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; the God of
the whole earth shall he be called.' Read also verses 6-8 of that
chapter. I could abundantly multiply scriptures to prove this to
be truth, but I shall only mind you of two or three, and so pass
on; the first is in Jude, verse 25, 'To the only wise God our
Saviour be glory.' And Acts 20:23; John 3:16; 1 John 5:20.

Object. But you will say, How is God a Saviour of sinners, seeing
his eyes are so pure that he cannot behold iniquity (Hab 1:13).

Answ. For answer hereunto. 'When the fulness of the time was come'
wherein the salvation of sinners should be actually wrought out,
'God sent forth his Son, [which Son is equal with the Father (John
1:1, 17:5, 10:30)] made of a woman, made under the law,' (that
is, he was subject to the power and curse of the law) to this end,
'to redeem them that [are, or] were under the law' (Gal 4:4,5),
that is, to deliver us 'from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us' (Gal 3:13). From whence take notice, that when the
salvation of sinners was to be actually wrought out, then God sent
forth the everlasting Son of his love into the world, clothed with
the human nature, according to that in John 1:14; Hebrews 2:14
and 1 Timothy 3:16 which saith, 'God was manifest in the flesh,'
that is, took flesh upon him.

Second, This Son of God, which is equal with the Father, did in
that flesh, which he took upon him, completely fulfil the whole
law: So that the Apostle saith, 'Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believeth' (Rom 10:4). This
righteousness which this Christ did accomplish, is called, 'The
righteousness of God' (Rom 3:22). This righteousness of God, is
by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that
believe: My meaning is, it is imputed to so many as shall by faith
lay hold on it. This is also part of the meaning of that speech
of the Apostle: 'As many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ' (Gal 3:27). That is, by faith have put on the
righteousness of Christ, with the rest of that which Christ hath
bestowed upon you, having accomplished it for you. This is also
the meaning of the Apostle (Col 2:9,10) where he saith, 'for in
him [that is the Son of Mary, (1:13,14)] dwelleth all the fulness
of the godhead bodily. And ye are complete in him.' That is, in
his obedience and righteousness; which also the Apostle himself
doth so hard press after (Phil 3:8,9), saying, 'doubtless, and I
count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord'; which Lord was crucified by the Jews, as
it is in 1 Corinthians 2:8 'for whom, [that is for Christ,] I have
suffered the loss of all things [as well the righteousness of the
law, in which I was blameless (Phil 3:6) as all other things]
and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ: And be found
in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith': which is 'unto all, and upon all them
that believe' (Rom 3:22). That place also in the ninth of Daniel
(vv 24,25), holdeth forth as much where prophesying of the Messias,
he saith, that it is he that came 'to finish the transgression, and
to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity,
and to bring in everlasting righteousness.' Now that the righteousness
of the Son of Mary is it, mind the 26th verse, where he saith
thus, 'And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut
off,' that is, Christ shall be crucified, 'but not cut off,' that
is, Christ shall be crucified, 'but not for himself,' that is, not
for any sin that he hath committed; for he committed none. Then
surely, it must be for the sins of the people (John 11:50), as
the high priest said, 'It is expedient for us that one man should
die for the people,' which man was the true Messias (Dan 9:24),
which also is the Son of Mary (Matt 1:18-23). And the Son of God
(Matt 3:17). And also the true God (1 John 5:20). And this Messias,
this Son of the Virgin, this Son of God, this true God, did not
die for himself, for he had not offended; neither did he fulfil the
law or finish transgression, and bring in everlasting righteousness
for himself, for he had not sinned (1 Peter 2:22), therefore it
must of necessity follow, that this righteousness of God, this
everlasting righteousness, is imputed to all, and upon all them
that believe (Rom 3:22; 2 Cor 5:19-21). But,

Thirdly, this Messias, this Son of Mary, this Son of God, this
true God, he was put to death for the sins that his children had
committed, according to that saying, 'Herein perceive we the love
of God, because he laid down his life for us' (1 John 3:16). Also
in Acts 20:28 the apostle speaking to the pastors of the churches,
saith, 'feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his
own blood.' See also Zechariah 12:10.

Now, I would not be mistaken. I do not think, or say, that he died
in his divine nature, but as it is written, he in his own body
on the tree did bear our sins (1 Peter 2:24); which tree was the
cross (Col 2:14). And as the apostle saith again, who 'when he
had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
majesty on high' (Heb 1:3). And again, the apostle speaking of
this glorious God, saith on this wise, (being before speaking of
his godhead) in Colossians 1:19-22, 'For it pleased the Father
that in him should all fulness dwell; and having made peace through
the blood of his cross by him to reconcile all things to himself:
by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in
heaven. And you, who were sometime alienated and enemies in your
mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled.' But how? why
in verse 22 he tells you, that it is 'in the body of his flesh
through death, to present you holy and unblamable and unreprovable
in his sight.' That is, Christ, who is the true God, after that
he had finished all actual obedience on earth, did in the power
and strength of his godhead (John 19:30, 10:18) yield up himself
to the wrath of his Father, which was due to poor sinners (and
that willingly) (Isa 63:3) [see Heb 9:14 and read that verse with
understanding] according to that saying in 1 Peter 3:18, 'For Christ
also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust': That
is, the Son of God for poor sinners: 'that he might bring us to
God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit.'
Again (1 Peter 4:1), 'Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for
us [not for himself (Dan 9:26)] in the flesh, [in his own body
which he took of the Virgin (1 Peter 2:24)] arm yourselves likewise
with the same mind': That is, let us die to sin as he did, that
we might live to God as he did, and doth (Rom 6:10). And thus have
I briefly showed you.

I. That the Son of Mary is very God.

II. That he made the world.

III. That he is our Saviour, and how.

IV. That he died for sinners, and how, namely, not in his divine
nature, but in his human, in his own body, and in his own flesh
(Col 1:22) redeeming his church with his own blood (Acts 20:28)
and with his own life (1 John 3:16; John 10:18).

We shall now pass on to some other things (the Lord willing) touching
his burial, resurrection, ascension, intercession, second coming,
resurrection of the body, and eternal judgment.

HIS BURIAL PROVED.--I shall prove by several scriptures that he
was buried, and so pass on. Therefore see that place, Matthew
27 verse 57 and so forward. After that Jesus the Son of God had
been crucified a while, he gave up the ghost; that is, he died;
and after he had been awhile dead, Joseph of Arimathea went into
Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave consent
thereto. And Joseph took the body of Jesus and wrapped it in clean
linen, and laid it (viz. the body of Jesus) in his own tomb, and
rolled a stone upon the mouth of the sepulchre, and departed. Also
in Luke 23:51-53. The apostle Paul also teacheth so much (1 Cor
15:3,4) where he saith, 'For I delivered unto you first of all that
which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according
to the scripture; And that he was buried.' Again, in Acts 13:29
the apostle speaking there of Jesus Christ, saith, 'And when they
had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him down from
the tree, and laid him in a sepulchre.' And so much touching the
burial of Jesus Christ the Son of God.

RESURRECTION. In the next place, I am to prove, That that very
man, whom the Jews did crucify between two thieves, called Jesus
Christ, did rise again. That very man, with that very body wherewith
he was crucified upon the cross, did rise again out of the grave
in which he was laid. And this I shall prove 1. by scripture, 2.
by the testimony of angels, 3. by Christ's own words after he was
risen, and 4. by the testimony of the apostles in the scripture.

First therefore consider, Psalm 16 verse10 where the prophet speaks
on this wise of Christ's resurrection; 'For thou wilt not leave
my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see
corruption.' Which words the Apostle Peter cites in Acts 2 from
verse 22 to 32, also Isaiah 26:19 in the person of Christ saith,
'Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall
they rise.' See also John 20:15, 16 where mention is made of his
appearing unto Mary Magdalene, and he called her Mary, and she
called him master; which signifies that he was risen, and that
she knew him after his resurrection; for he was come out of the
grave, see verses 6, 7, 8. Again, another scripture is that in Luke
24:1-3. The disciples of Jesus coming to the sepulchre, thinking
to anoint the body of Jesus, found the stone that was on the mouth
of the sepulchre rolled away; and when they went in, they found
not the body of the Lord Jesus; and at this they were troubled and
perplexed (v 4). But as two of them went up to Emmaus, and were
talking of what had befallen to Jesus, Jesus himself drew near,
and went with them (v 15). Another scripture is that in Mark 16:9
which saith on this wise, 'Now when Jesus was risen early the first
day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom
he had cast seven devils.' Where take notice how the Holy Ghost
lays it down in these words, out of whom he had cast seven devils.
To intimate to us the certainty, that it was the same Jesus that
was born of the virgin Mary, who did many miracles, and cured many
diseases, who did also cast seven devils out of Mary Magdalen,
that did rise again. Yea, saith the Holy Ghost, it was the same
Jesus that did work such a wonderful miracle on Mary, he appeared
to her first, out of whom he had cast seven devils. And let these
scriptures suffice to prove the resurrection of the Son of God.

Second, you shall have the testimony of the holy angels also by the
scriptures. And first look into Mark 16:3-7 the words are these,
'And they [viz. the disciples] said among themselves, Who shall
roll us away the stone?' They had a good mind to see their Lord,
but they could not, as they thought, get away the stone which
covered the mouth of the sepulchre. 'And when they looked [that
is, towards the sepulchre] they saw that the stone was rolled
away: for it was very great. And entering into the sepulchre, they
saw a young man [that is, an angel] sitting on the right side,
clothed in a long white garment; and They [the disciples] were
affrighted. And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted [you have
no cause for it] Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified:
he is risen, he is not here; behold the place where they laid
him.' What scripture can be plainer spoken than this? Here is an
angel of the Lord ready to satisfy the disciples of Jesus, that
he was risen from the dead. And lest they should think it was not
the right Jesus he spoke of, Yes, saith he, it is the same Jesus
that you mean; you seek Jesus of Nazareth, do you not? Why he is
risen, he is not here. But do you speak seriously, and in good
earnest? Yea surely, if you will not believe me, behold the place
where they laid him. This scripture, or testimony is very clear
to our purpose. But again, the next place is in Matthew 28:3-7.
In the third verse there is an angel (as before) bearing witness
of the resurrection of Jesus. 'His countenance was like lightning,
and his raiment white as snow: And for fear of him the keepers did
shake, and became as dead men. And the angel answered and said
unto them, [viz. to the women who came to seek Jesus] Fear not
ye': but let them that seek to keep the Lord in his grave fear if
they will; for you have no ground of fear, who seek Jesus who was
crucified; He is not here, for he is risen; he cannot be in body
here and risen too: If you will not believe me, come, see where
the Lord lay, and go quickly and tell his disciples that he is
risen from the dead; and behold, he goeth before you into Galilee,
there shall you see him. But shall we be sure of it? Yea, saith
the angel, Lo, it is I that have told you. See how plainly this
scripture also doth testify of Christ his resurrection. Here,
saith the angel, you seek a Saviour and none will content you but
he, even the same that was crucified: Well you shall have him,
but he is not here. Why, where is he then? He is risen from the
dead. But are you sure it is the same that we look for? Yea, it is
the same that was crucified (v 5). But where should we find him?
why, he goeth before you into Galilee, where he used to be in his
life-time, before he was crucified: And that you might be sure of
it, there to find him, know that he is an angel of God that hath
told you (v 7). And thus have you in brief the testimony of the
angels of God, to witness that Jesus the son of the virgin, the
Son of God, is risen from the dead.

Object. But you will say, might they not be deceived? Might not
their eyes dazzle, and they might think they did see such a thing,
when indeed there was no such matter?

Ans. Well, because it is so difficult a matter, to be persuaded
of the truth of this thing, that Christ is raised again out of
the grave, that very man, with that very body; though these things
that have been already spoken, might be enough (through grace)
to satisfy, yet because of the unbelief of some, we shall turn to
some more of those infallible proofs that are spoken of in Acts
1:3 to prove the point yet more clear.

Third, Do but see how the Lord doth deal with an unbelieving
disciple (John 20:23-29). You shall see in the 23d verse, Christ
after his resurrection is talking with his disciples, but Thomas
was not with them. But when the disciples saw him again, they
said unto him, We have seen the Lord (v 25) but Thomas would not
believe them. Another time Jesus comes to his disciples again,
and then Thomas was with them; then so soon as the Lord had said,
'Peace be unto you,' he turned himself to Thomas, and said to him;
'Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach
hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless,
but believing' (v 27). As much as if the Lord should have said,
Come Thomas, thou hast doubted of the truth of my resurrection
very much; thou sayest that thou wilt not believe, except thou do
feel with thy fingers the print of the nails, and do thrust thy
hand into my side. Come Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold
my hands, and see if there were not the nails driven through them;
and reach hither thy hands and thrust them into my side, and feel
if I have not the very hold in it still, that was made with the
spear that the soldier did thrust into it, and be not so full of
unbelief, but believe that my resurrection is a glorious truth.

Another infallible proof, is that in Luke 24 from the 36th, to
the end of the 44th verse. In verse 30 it is said that the Lord,
(even while they were talking) 'stood in the midst of them and
saith unto them, Peace be unto you': But they were so far from
being at peace, that they were terrified, and supposed that they
had seen a spirit. And Jesus said to them, 'Why are ye troubled,
and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?' What, do you think that
I am a spirit? Do you think your eyes dazzle? 'Behold my hands
and my feet.' Look well upon me, and see my hands, and the holes
in them, and likewise my feet, and the holes in them, and know
that it is I myself, and not a spirit, as you suppose. Know, that
it is I myself, and not another. Doth your hearts fail you? Then
take hold of me with your hands, yea, 'handle me, and see; for a
spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he
had thus spoken he shewed them his hands and his feet.' As if he
had said, Come my disciples, take special notice of me, do not be
daunted, nor affrighted, but consider that it is I myself. Well,
they could not believe as yet, but wondered that such a thing as
this should be: And while they were thus wondering he will give
them another infallible proof: And 'he said unto them, have you
here any meat?' (v 41). As if the Lord had said, Come my disciples,
I see that you are very full of unbelief, if you have here any
meat, you shall see me eat before you all. And they gave him a
piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb, 'And he took it, and
did eat before them.' Again (v 42), the Lord strives with another
infallible proof against their doubting, saying, My disciples,
do you not remember what discourse you and I had before I was
crucified, how that I told you, that all things must be fulfilled
which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets
concerning me (Mark 8:31, 14:21). Another infallible proof was,
that appearance of his at the sea of Tiberias, where he came to
them on the shore, and called them, and provided for them a dinner,
and wrought a notable miracle while he was there with them at that
time, namely, the catching of 153 great fishes, and yet their net
break not. (John 21, read that whole chapter, and Acts 10:41.)
Which as it was a great miracle, so it did also show his power
and authority over his creatures. Besides his eating and drinking
with his disciples after his resurrection; and also his preaching
to them (Acts 1:3). This is not the least, viz. that he was with
his disciples on earth forty days, which was almost six weeks,
speaking to them the things concerning his kingdom: which was a
mighty confirmation of their faith in his resurrection.

Fourth, I shall now briefly touch two or three scriptures, the
which hold forth his disciples' testimony of his resurrection.
And the first is in Acts 10:40, 41. In which place the Apostle
speaking of the Lord Jesus, saith, 'Him God raised up the third
day, and shewed him openly,' yet 'Not to all the people, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God, even to us [saith the Apostle] who
did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.' Again,
Acts 4:10 and 13:29-31. The words run thus (the Apostle speaking
of Jesus, saith) 'And when they had fulfilled all that was written
of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a
sepulchre. But God raised him from the dead: And he was seen many
days of them which came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem,
who are his witnesses unto the people.' See 1 Corinthians 15:1-8.
And thus far touching his resurrection from the dead.

ASCENSION. In the next place I am to prove that this very man,
Christ Jesus, the Son of the virgin, in his very body, the same
body that was crucified, is above the clouds and the heavens. And
though this is made light of by those men called quakers, and other
infidels of this generation: Yet I am sure that it will prove true
to their cost, who reject it as erroneous and vain. But to prove
it, First, I shall prove that he is ascended. Secondly, that he
is ascended above the clouds, and the heaven.

First, that he is ascended, see Ephesians 4:8-10. 'Wherefore
[saith the Apostle] When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. Now that he ascended, what is
it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the
earth, he that descended is the same also that ascended [again]
up far above all heavens.'

Again, read John 20:17 where Christ after his resurrection from
the dead, saith to Mary Magdalen, 'Touch me not; for I am not
yet ascended to my Father': That is, I have not yet ascended with
this my body wherewith I was crucified on the cross. 'But go to
my brethren, and say unto them [meaning his disciples] I ascend
unto my Father and your Father; and to my God and your God.'

Object. But in that place, (may some say) (Eph 4:10) He that
descended, is said to be the same that ascended. Now there was no
human nature with God in heaven before the world was; Therefore
if he be but the same that was with the Father from all eternity,
then the humanity of the Son of Mary is not ascended into heaven.

Ans. For answer, It is clear from John 1:1 that the Word or Son
of God, as he was a Spirit, was with the Father before the world
was (Titus 1:2). But now, in the fulness of time, that is, when
that time that the Father and he had concluded on, was come, 'God
sent forth his son [which was with him before the world was (John
17:5)] made of a woman' (Gal 4:4); that is, born of a woman. 'And
took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness
of men' (Phil 2:6,7). Now as he was born of a woman, as he was
in the likeness of men, so he ascended to the right hand of his
Father, in our nature. And for this, I pray turn to Acts 1:9-11
and there you shall find, that he is the same that was born of the
virgin, that very man that was crucified; if you compare verse 3
with verses 9, 10, 11 you will find it so to be. Now in verse 9
after he had spoken many things while they beheld, that is, while
his disciples looked on him, he was taken up, that is, he was taken
up from them into heaven, as in verse 11 and a cloud received him
out of their sight. And while they looked up stedfastly towards
heaven, as he went up (which heaven, was not within them; if it
had, they needed not to have looked toward the clouds and the
heaven without them) behold two men stood by them, not in them,
in white apparel, which also said (that is, the two men, or angels
which stood by them said) Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing
up into heaven? Here again, they did not look within them, but
stood gazing or looking after the Lord Jesus, the Son of Mary,
who was carried away from them in a cloud (v 9). But why (say the
angels) do you stand gazing so much into heaven: your master will
come again after a certain time (Matt 25:19; Mark 13:34). For,
This same Jesus, namely, which was crucified, which rose again,
and hath been with you these forty days, which also you see go
into heaven, shall so come, (namely in a cloud) as ye have seen
him go into heaven (Acts 1:3). But shall he not lose his body
before he come again? No say the angels, he shall so come, that
is, as ye have seen him go; in like manner, that is, with the same
body. Or else I am sure he cannot come in the same manner, if he
lose his body before he comes again; for he went thither with that
body. But that same Jesus that was crucified, is he that went,
or ascended up into heaven. If you compare Luke 24:39-44 with the
50th and 51st verses of the same chapter, you may clearly find it
so to be. And therefore if he come again in like manner, he must
come again with the same body wherewith he was crucified.

Object. But you will say, The scripture saith, he that descended
is the same that ascended, which to me (say you) implies, none
but the Spirit's ascending?

Ans. For answer, we do not say, (as I said before) that it is
another that ascended, but the very same: That is, the very same
Christ, that was with the Father from everlasting did come down
from heaven: That same Christ also that came down from heaven did
ascend up thither again; only, he descended without a body from
heaven, and took flesh and blood upon him from the virgin. And
though he descended without a body, yet he, the very same Christ
that descended without a body, the same did ascend again with
a body, even that very body that he took of the virgin Mary. See
Luke 24 from 39th to 51st verses; Acts 2:30, 31; John 15:1; 1
Corinthians 9:24, 25. Now let me give you a similitude, for it is
warrantable; for both Christ and his apostles did sometimes use
them, to the end, souls might be better informed. The similitude
is this, Suppose there come into thine house a man that is naked,
and without clothing, though he go out of thy house again well
clothed, yet the same man that came in without clothing, is the
same man also that goes out of thy house, though very well clothed.
Even so it is in this case, The Lord Jesus came into the womb of
the virgin, Spirit (Matt 1:18), but he came out of the womb clothed
with a body, and went up into heaven again clothed with a body.
Compare Luke 24:39 with Acts 1:11 and 2 :30, 31.

Now also I shall lay down some few things to be considered, for
the better clearing of it.

Consider 1. That he did say to his disciples that he would go away
from them (John 14:3, 16:7; Matt 25:19). Yea, saith he, I go and
prepare a place for you, and then I will, after a long time, come
again, and take you to myself, that where I am, that is, whither
I am going, there ye may be also. Now, I say, if Christ had not
gone from his disciples (for that was his meaning) touching his
bodily presence; I say, if he had not gone away from them, in respect
of his bodily presence, he had said more than he had performed;
which is horrible blasphemy once to assert; which going of his,
is his going into heaven. See 1 Peter 3:22.

Consider 2. That there it was that he was to receive the promise
of the Father (Luke 24:49), which promise was the shedding forth
in an abundant manner the blessed Holy Ghost. And for this see
Acts 2:33-36, 'Therefore being by the right hand of God [which is
in heaven] exalted, and having received of the Father the promise
of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and
hear. For David is not ascended into the heavens: but he saith
himself, the Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
until I make thy foes thy footstool. Therefore let all the house
of Israel know assuredly [for 'tis very true] that God hath made
that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.'

Consider 3. That if he were on earth, he could not be a priest (Heb
8:4). Now the man Christ Jesus is a glorious priest (Heb 7:24) in
the heavens (Heb 9:24). And therefore he is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God by him, seeing he ever liveth to
make intercession for them. (This man (7:25)).

Consider 4. If he be not gone into heaven, both his own, and his
Apostles' doctrine is false; yea, the witness of the angels also,
which to think were damnable infidelity in any man (1 Peter 3:22;
Acts 1:9-11).

Consider 5. Know that he is gone into heaven, because the scriptures
say he is; which is the very truth of God, spoken by his holy
Apostles and prophets: Yea, holy men of God, spake them as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost (Eph 6:9; 1 Peter 3:22; Heb 9:24).

Consider 6. If thou sayest that that man is not gone into heaven,
then thou must also conclude that he is still in the grave; and if
so, then thou sayest that the prophets, apostles, angels, Christ,
God, and all are liars, who have testified these things in the
scriptures for glorious truths (Isa 26:19; Acts 10:40-43, 13:30-39,
1:9-11; Rev 1:17,18, 2:8). And as the Apostle saith of himself,
and the rest of the Apostles and ministers of Jesus Christ, 'And
we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified
of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be
that the dead rise not.--But now is Christ risen from the dead,
and become the first fruits of them that slept. For as by man
came death, by MAN came also the resurrection of the dead' (1 Cor
15:15,20-22).

Second, Now I am to prove, that he is above the clouds and the
heavens. My meaning is, he is above the lowest heavens. For there
are three, as appears in 2 Corinthians 12:1-4. I knew a man in
Christ, (saith Paul there) caught up into the third heaven. Now,

Heaven in scripture, is taken sometimes metaphorically, and sometimes
properly. First, Metaphorically it is taken for the church and
people of God, as in Revelation 12:12. Second, Properly, it is
taken for the material heaven, where the sun, moon, and stars are
placed, as in Genesis 1:8, 14, 15, 16 compared together: above
which heaven, Jesus the Son of Mary is ascended. Therefore I pray
you consider with me a little.

Consider 1. That when he went into this heaven into which he is
gone, he went AWAY from his disciples, as it is written, If I go
not away, the comforter will not come (John 14:2,3; John 16:7;
Acts 1:9-11). So that he did not go into a heaven within them in
his person and human nature. If so, he must needs go into that
heaven without, above the clouds and the stars (Gen 1:8,5,16).

Consider 2. He was caught away in a cloud; yea, and was caught
upwards from them, as it is Acts 1:9-11 and carried away into
heaven; yea, and his disciples stood gazing or looking up after
him into heaven, which heaven must needs be that above the clouds.
(1.) If you consider the posture of the disciples, they looked
upwards after the cloud that did take him away. (2.) Consider the
manner of his going, it was in a cloud. (3.) He was received out
of their sight. (4.) And so received up into heaven; which heaven
must needs be above the clouds, where God is in his special presence
(Job 22:12-14). But further,

Consider 3. That those believers that are alive at this day in
the body, 'are absent from the Lord' (2 Cor 5:6), but now, if the
man Christ were ascended into that heaven within them, he would
neither be 'absent from them,' nor they from him; but in that he
is absent from them touching his bodily presence, and they from
him touching the same, it is evident that that heaven into which
he is ascended, must needs be without, above the clouds.

Consider 4. That that heaven into which the man Christ is ascended,
must contain him till the time of the restitution of all things,
as in Acts 3:21 into which heaven he hath been ascended above
sixteen hundred years by computation. And I am sure there is not
a saint that doth live in the world half so long, before he fall
asleep, and be gathered to his fathers; so that that heaven into
which he is ascended, is not within, but must needs be that above
the clouds. But

Consider 5. That he that ascended from his disciples, was a man,
with flesh and bones, not a sprit only; for handle me, and
see, (saith he) for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see
me have (Luke 24:39,50,51). Now let the adversaries show by the
scriptures, that there is any place in them called heaven, that
is able to contain a man of some four or five feet long, the space
of fifteen or sixteen hundred years; besides that: therefore, it
must needs be that heaven without, which is above the clouds and
stars.

Consider 6. That heaven into which the Lord Jesus that man is
ascended must not contain him always; for, saith the Apostle (1
Thess 4:16) 'The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the archangel.' So that there is another
descending from that heaven into which he is ascended; and his
descending from that heaven is to this end, namely, to take his
people to himself, as it is verse 17 so that it is clear that it
is not any heaven within thee, into which the man Christ that was
born of the Virgin Mary is ascended, but it must needs be that
heaven without, which is above the clouds (Heb 12:22). If thou
consider, that the place into which he ascended, even the heaven
into which he is entered, is the same place where all the deceased
saints are in their spirits: 'Therefore,' saith Paul, 'I desire
to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better.' Now Paul
did not in this place (Phil 1:23) mean the enjoying of Christ
only in the Spirit; for that he enjoyed in great measure when he
spake these words; but he spake of a dying, and being with Christ
after this life is ended; as is clear if you compare the 20th to
the 26th verses together, being absent from him while he was here
in the body (2 Cor 5:6). For 'whilst we are at home in the body,
we are absent from the Lord.'

Consider 7. That that heaven into which the man Christ is ascended,
is not into his church on earth; but into heaven without, above
the clouds and the stars (John 16:7, 14:1-3; 1 Tim 2:5). And this
David doth prophesy of (Psa 47:5), where he saith, 'God is gone up
with a shout, the LORD with the sound of a trumpet.' Now Christ,
as God merely, could not go up, being no less in one place than
another; but as God-man, or in his human nature, he went up; as
will clearly appear (Eph 4:8-10) where he speaketh of his triumph
over all the enemies of his people at his resurrection and ascension
into heaven above the clouds.

Consider 8. When Christ doth descend from that heaven into which
he is now ascended, his saints and he will meet one another, just
in the air, according to the scripture (1 Thess 4:16,17), 'For,'
(saith he) 'the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God:
and the dead in Christ shall rise first: [that is, they shall come
out of their graves]. Then we which [shall be saved] are alive
[at that day] and remain shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be
with the Lord.'

Pray mark here a little, and see what heaven the man Christ is
ascended into, and see if it be not the heaven without, above the
sun, moon, and stars.

When Christ and his saints do meet a second time together, the
one ascends and the other descends; the one is caught up in the
clouds towards the heaven, the other descends from heaven towards
the earth, and they must needs meet one another just in the air,
that is, between the heaven and the earth. So then, the one coming
from heaven and the other from the earth, and their meeting being
in the air, which is between heaven and earth, is an undeniable
demonstration, that that heaven into which the man Christ is
ascended, must needs be that heaven without, above the sun, moon,
and stars (Phil 3:20; 1 Thess 1:10). And thus much touching the
Son of Mary, his ascending up into the heaven without above the
clouds (Acts 1:9-11, 3:21; 1 Peter 3:22).

INTERCESSION. In the next place, now I shall prove the intercession
of the man Christ Jesus to be in the heaven that I have been
speaking of; though some have mocked at it, and others have called
it juggling; which names here I shall not mention, only I shall
admonish them, that they do not blaspheme the truth and Son of
God in his intercession.

I shall quote some of the scriptures that hold out this truth,
and so pass on.

First, And first of all, see Psalm 16:4 where David prophesying
of the intercession of Christ, saith, 'Their sorrows shall be
multiplied that hasten after another God, [speaking of the wicked]
their drink-offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their
names into my lips.' Now, compare this with Hebrews 8:4 where
he saith, 'if he were on earth, he should not be a priest.' And
Hebrews 9:24, 'For Christ is not entered into the holy places
made with hands, [meaning the temple which Solomon built] which
are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear
in the presence of God for us': 'wherefore he is able also to save
them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
liveth to make intercession for them' (Heb 7:25).

Second, But you will say, is there a man made mention of here?
Yes, for the scripture saith, 'There is one God, and one mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus' (1 Tim 2:5). And in
that 8th to the Hebrews made mention of before; where the Apostle
is speaking of Christ's priestly office, as he is in the heavens,
compared with other priests that are on earth; he saith (v 3),
'For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices:
wherefore [speaking of Christ] it is of necessity that this man
have somewhat also to offer. For if he were on earth, he should
not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts
according to the law,' which law was the law of Moses (9:19-23),
where also he is speaking of the priesthood of the priests under
the law, and their offering of the blood of bulls and goats (v 12
compared with vv 19-21). And of the Lord Jesus the high priests
of saints, and of his blood (v 14 compared with v 24). Now as men
under the law did offer up the blood of bulls and goats, so the
man Christ Jesus did offer up his own blood to his Father; and this
you may clearly see, if you compare Hebrews 9:14 where he saith,
'How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences
from dead works to serve the living God?' [with] Hebrews 10:12
where he saith, 'But this man [meaning the Son of the Virgin (2:14
compared with Matt 1:21)] after he had offered one sacrifice for
sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God'; again (Heb 7)
the chapter I mentioned before, you shall find his intercession
plainly held forth, if you read verse 22 and so on, where the
scripture saith, 'By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better
testament. And they truly were many priests [meaning the priests
under the law] because they were not suffered to continue by
reason of death': (that is, the high-priest under the law, could
not live ever in this world, because it was appointed to all men
once to die) (Rev 2:8). But when he speaks of Christ Jesus, he
saith on this wise, 'But this man, because he continueth ever,
hath an unchangeable priesthood' (Rev 1:18). Wherefore he (this
man) is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by him, seeing he (this man) ever liveth to make intercession
for them. And thus in brief have I proved through the assistance
of the Lord, the intercession of the Son of Mary, which is also
the Son of God. And this concerning Christ's priestly office,
might serve also for a proof of his being in the heaven without,
above the stars. But all men may see (unless they be blind) that
these are the truths of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of God his
Father; and that those men that oppose them (as the quakers do)
are very violently possessed of the devil, and besides themselves;
and have neither the truth of God, nor his Spirit in them (2 John
9:10; John 5:38,42).

[CHRIST JUDGE OF QUICK AND DEAD.] And now through the assistance
of the Lord, I shall come to the last that I promised, and that
is to prove, that this very man Christ, will come to judge the
quick and the dead. And first, I shall prove the truth itself,
viz., That that man shall come again to judge the world, quick
and dead. Second, I shall shew you that his coming will be very
shortly. Third, What shall be done at his coming. fourth, Who
shall stand when he shall come, and who not.

First, That that man that was born of the Virgin Mary shall come
again to judge the quick and the dead, read 2 Timothy 4:1. 'I,
[saith Paul] charge thee therefore before God, [speaking to him,
even to Timothy, and so to all believers] and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing
and his kingdom.' Now if you would know who this Lord Jesus is,
look into Acts 10:28 and you shall see it was Jesus of Nazareth;
would you know who that was? read Matthew 2 towards the end, and
you shall see it was the Son of Mary the Virgin, who was espoused
to Joseph the carpenter. But read Acts 10:38-42, you shall find
these words, 'God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost
and with the power: who went about doing good, and healing all
that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him: And we
are witness of things which he did both in the land of the Jews,
and in Jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a tree, [even
Jesus of Nazareth] Him God raised up the third day, and shewed him
openly; not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before
of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose
from the dead. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, [that
is, God commanded us] and to testify [that is, to be bold in our
preaching] that it is he [namely, Jesus of Nazareth, whom the
Jews did thus crucify] which was ordained of God to be the judge
of quick and dead.' This is he also that is spoken of in Acts
17:30, 31. 'The times of this ignorance God winked at; [meaning
men's being without the gospel] but now commandeth all men everywhere
to repent: Because he hath appointed a day [which day is the day
of judgment (Matt 12:36)] in the which he will judge the world
in righteousness, by that man [namely, Jesus of Nazareth] whom he
hath ordained, [compare this with that in Acts 10:38-42] whereof
he hath given assurance unto all men [that is, hath given a sure
sign unto all men] in that he hath raised him, [that is, in that
he hath raised Jesus of Nazareth] from the dead.' This also is
Christ's own meaning (Matt 24) where speaking of his second coming,
he styleth himself the Son of man, saying: 'And then shall appear
the sign of the Son of man' (v 30), and 'so shall also the coming
of the Son of man be' (v 27). So shall also the coming of the Son
of man be (v 37). So shall also the coming of the Son of man be
(v 39). Where, by the way, it is observable to see how the Lord
of life and glory doth in this chapter, where he speaketh of his
second coming, for the most part style himself the Son of man.
Sure he doth it to this end, because he will not have his humanity
and the doctrine thereof, to be razed out from under heaven: For
he knew, that in the last days, there would come mockers 'walking
after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his
coming' (2 Peter 3:3). I could multiply scriptures to prove this
doctrine of his second coming, as Hebrews 9:28; 2 Peter 3; 2 Thess
1:6-8; Luke 21; Matt 24, 25; Eve 22:7, 12 and 20; 2 Corinthians
5:10; Romans 14:10; Acts 24:25. But,

Secondly, I will shew you that his coming will be shortly. It is
true, no man can tell neither the day nor the hour, yet so far as
the scriptures will give us light into the nearness of his coming,
so far we may go. And if you read Matthew 24 you shall see many
sings of his coming spoken of.

1. There is falling away from the faith spoken of. And that hath
been fulfilled and is fulfilling every day.

2. Wars and rumours of wars is another sign that his coming doth
draw night, even at the doors.

3. The love of many waxing cold, is another sign that it is nigh,
even the coming of Christ. And how cold is the love of many at
this day? They that were hot two or three years ago, are now grown
lukewarm and cold. They are cold in the Lord's appearing. They
are cold in the profession of the gospel. They are cold in love to
the saints, they are cold in the worship of God; Yea, very cold,
which is a notable demonstration that the coming of the Lord
draweth nigh.

4. The stars falling from heaven; (That is professors falling
from the faith which once they professed) is another sign that
the coming of the Lord is at hand. And how many professors do you
see now a-days, fall from the doctrine of God, and his Son Jesus
Christ, as though there were no such thing as a world to come,
and no such thing as a Lord Jesus Christ, and his second coming.

5. Many poor souls will go on in their profession with lamps
without oil, just before his second coming (Matt 25:1-7). And the
Lord knows that most of the professors of this generation, are
such kind of professors, yea, very foolish professors, which is
another sure sign, that the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

6. When the time of Christ's second coming is at hand, there will
be but a very little faith in the world. And the Lord knows, that
there be many, who are now as high as lucifer, that at that day
for want of faith will be thrown down to the sides of the pit:
even in the very belly of hell.

7. Another sign of Christ's second coming, is the carnal mindedness
of the most of the world; and the very carriages of almost all
men now living do discover this truth to be at this day fulfilled,
and know that when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden
destruction comes, and they shall not escape (1 Thess 5:1-4).

8. Before Christ's second coming, there shall come many false Christs
and false prophets, and shall shew great signs, and wonders, to
seduce if it were possible the elect (Matt 24:24; Mark 13:22). And
is not this more clearly fulfilled in our days than ever it was,
especially among those men called quakers, who being as persons,
whose consciences are seared with an hot iron, and they being sealed
up unto destruction, do some of them call themselves Christ, and
shew great signs, (as their quaking) and such a legal holiness, as
makes the simple admire them, and wonder after them, which shews
the coming of Christ to be very nigh.

9. Before Christ's second coming, there shall come scoffers in
the world, walking after their own lusts (2 Peter 3:3) and if ever
this scripture was fulfilled, it is fulfilled on these men called
quakers: For they are the men, that at this day make a mock
at Christ's second coming, which shall be from heaven without (1
Thess 1:10; Phil 3:20); and therefore saith the Holy Ghost, these
mockers shall be such as shall say, where is the promise of his
coming? For since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as
they were, see 2 Peter 3:3-7. And there you shall see their mocking
and the reason of it. Read and the Lord give thee understanding.
But I would not have thee think that I speak at random, in this
thing, Know for certain, that I myself have heard them blaspheme;
yea, with a grinning countenance, at the doctrine of that man's
second coming from heaven above the stars, who was born of the
Virgin Mary. Yea, they have told me to my face, that I have used
conjuration, and witchcraft, because what I preached was according
to the scriptures. I was also told to my face, that I preached up
an idol, because I said, that the Son of Mary was in heaven, with
the same body that was crucified on the cross; And many other
things have they blasphemously vented against the Lord of life and
glory, and his precious gospel. The Lord reward them according as
their work shall be.

I could have hinted in many other things which Christ and his
Apostles have shewed to be signs of his coming. But I shall commend
the holy scriptures unto thee, which are able to make the man of
God perfect in all things, through faith in the Lord Jesus (2 Tim
3:17).

Now you have also the manner of his coming how it shall be, most
notably laid down in the scriptures. I shall hint in a few things
touching it.

1. He will come when there is but very few looking for his coming.
'When they shall say, peace and safety; then sudden destruction
cometh' (1 Thess 5:1-3). Which sudden destruction will be at his
second coming, for that is it which the Apostle spake of in those
three verses. Then will all the world be caught at such an unexpected
time, that it will come upon them, even as a snare cometh upon
those creatures that are caught in it. As it is written (Luke
21:35) 'For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the
face of the whole earth.' Which is all on a sudden, before they
are aware.

2. He cometh with all his saints and angels. Then will the Lord
descend from that heaven, into which he is now ascended, as it is
written in 1 Thessalonians 4:16. Then will he come, and all his
saints with him, as Jude saith in his Epistle, 15. then shall
Abel and Enoch, Noah and Abraham, David and Job, Peter and Paul:
Together with all the saints which have been, now are, or hereafter
shall be, and they shall sit on the throne with the Lord Jesus
Christ, as in Matthew 19:28. Before whom shall all the nations
of the world be gathered, as it is written (Joel 3:12). 'Let the
heathen be wakened [or raised out of their graves (Dan 12:2)]
and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to
judge the heathen round about.' Which never was yet accomplished,
though it shall certainly be, in God's time: To the astonishment,
and everlasting damnation of all those that shall continue mocking,
or sinning against God and his Christ.

3. He shall come in a flaming fire, (when he doth come again: he
will come in such a manner, as will make all that shall be found
in their sins rather seek to creep under a mountain, than to meet
the Lord of glory (Rev 6:15)). As Isaiah saith, 'For, behold, the
LORD will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind,
to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire'
(Isa 66:15). 'To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they
have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him' (Jude 15), as I shall
shew farther by and by.

Third, And therefore in the next place, I shall shew you, what
shall be done when he is come.

1. When Christ is come the second time, they that are in their
graves shall arise, and come forth of their graves (as I said
before) in which they have lain according to that in John 5:28, 29.
Where Christ saith, 'Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming,
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection
of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation.' You will say, Are these graves spoken of here, the
graves that are made in the earth? Yea, that they are, and for
a further proof of the same, look into Daniel 12:2. Daniel there
speaking of the same thing saith, 'And many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake, [or arise] some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt' (or damnation).

I shall not stand here to dispute any distinctions of the
resurrections, only prove that the dead shall arise; and that is
a clear truth from the scriptures (Acts 10:42; Rev 20:11-14; 1
Thess 4:16; 1 Cor 15:52). 'The dead shall be raised.'

2. He shall call all men and women to an account for all their[3]
close sinful thoughts, words and actions; then will the secrets
of all hearts be made manifest. Then shall all thy adulterous,
and thievish, and covetous, idolatrous, and blasphemous thoughts
be laid open, according to that saying, 'Their consciences also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean [time, or] while accusing
or else excusing one another' (Rom 2:15). But when? Why, 'In the
day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ' (v
16). See also 1 Corinthians 4:5, 'Therefore judge nothing before
the time.' What time is that? Why, when the Lord comes; what will
he do? He 'will bring to light the hidden things of darkness,'
that is, all those cunning, close, hidden wickednesses that thou
in thy life-time hast committed; yea, he will 'make manifest the
counsels of the hearts'; that is, the most hidden and secret things
that are contrived and plotted by the sons of men. Then shall all
the midnight whore-mongers be laid open with all their sins; Then
thou (it may be) who has committed such sins as thou wouldest not
have thy neighbour, thy father, thy wife, thy husband, or any one
else know of for thousands, then thou shalt have them all laid
open, even upon the house tops (Luke 12:3). Then thou that hatest
God's children; his ways, his word, his Spirit; then thou that
makest a mock at Jesus of Nazareth's second coming, then thou
that livest in open prophaneness, or secret hypocrisy, then I say,
will be such a time of reckoning for you, as never was since the
world began, then you that shall die in your sins, will cry to
the mountains, Fall on us, and cover us from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb (which Lamb
is the Man Christ Jesus (John 1:29)). And ah, my friends! If the
very looks of God be so terrible, what will his blows be, think
you? Then if all thy idle words shall be accounted for, as it is
written, 'But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment' (Matt
12:36) and also all thy filthy actions shall be then regarded in
such sort, as thou shalt receive a just recompense for them. And
know, saith the scripture, 'that for all these things, God will
bring thee into judgment' (Eccl 11:9). Then

Thou that art an unbeliever, shalt be sure to fall under the judgment
for all thy sins. (1.) Thou must give an account. (2.) Thou must
fall in the judgment. Oh my friends, there are hot days a-coming
for all those that are found out of the Lord Jesus: Behold, saith
Malachi, 'The day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all
the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and
the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the LORD of hosts,
that it shall leave them neither root nor branch' (4:1). The day
of judgment will burn like an oven, and all that have not the
righteousness of Christ upon them shall be as stubble. Ah friends,
put a red hot oven and stubble together, and what work will there
be! Even the one will burn and destroy the other.

3. When Christ doth come the second time, another end of his coming
will be to pure out all things that offended in this kingdom (Matt
13:41,42). 'The Son of Man shall send forth his angels, and they
shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them
which do iniquity; And shall cast them into a furnace of fire;
there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.' There are many
things that do offend in his kingdom now: namely

(1.) The lukewarm professor, he doth offend, (a.) the Lord, (b.)
his people. But then thou lukewarm offending professor shalt offend
the church of God no more.

(2.) The loose professors do also offend God, Christ and his church.
(a.) He scandals the gospel by his loose walking, and naughty
carriages. (b.) He doth make the world blaspheme the name of God
by the same. (c.) He grieves the hearts of God's people (Phil
3:18). But know that thou also shalt be taken away from offending
any more, God, Christ, and his saints, and thou shalt have weeping
and gnashing of teeth, for thy thus offending (Matt 18:6,7).

4. Another end of Christ's second coming, is to cut off all the
ignorant persons that are in the world. There is a generation of
poor souls that do think to be excused for their ignorance: Alas!
saith one, I am a poor ignorant man, or woman; and therefore I
hope that the Lord will have mercy upon me: we cannot, say others,
do as such and such, and will the Lord condemn us? And thus poor
souls, as they are in the broad way to destruction, lest they
should miss of the way to hell; do swallow down by clusters, that
which will poison them, body and soul for ever and ever.

Quest. But you will say, What, will not the Lord have mercy on
ignorant souls?

Ans. Not on those who live and die in their ignorance. He himself
hath said (Isa 27:11), 'For it is a people of no understanding:
therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them will shew them no favour.' Again, Paul also in
that 2 Thessalonians 1:8 saith, that when Jesus Christ shall come
to judge the world, he doth come to take vengeance on all 'them
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.'

But ye will say, Who are those ignorant persons, that shall find
no favour at that day? or how doth the ignorance discover itself?
I shall only mention three or four sorts of men; and leave thee to
the scriptures, which if thou read them diligently, will further
lay them open before thee. And,

(1.) The profane scoffer, who makes a mock at the truths of God,
and so goes on in his sins, for this see in 2 Peter 3:3 which
the apostle attributes to their ignorance (v 5). And therefore he
likens them to brute beasts (2:10,12) who 'walk after the flesh in
the lust of uncleanness,' and 'speak evil of the things that they
understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption';
who because they understand not the scripture, nor the power of
God in them, speak evil of the truths therein contained, and think
the Lord like unto themselves (Psa 50).

(2.) The formal professor, who hath only a notion of the gospel,
and some seeming holiness, but wants gospel faith: such are called
foolish virgins (Matt 25:2,3) to whom Christ will say in that day,
Verily, 'I know you not.' Add hereto, those that think it enough
to confess Christ with their mouths, and profess that they know
God, but deny him in their works; such notwithstanding all their
profession, shall, if they so continue, perish eternally, being
abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, or void
of judgment, that is, ignorant (Titus 1:16).

(3.) The legal righteous man or woman, though they walk blameless,
as touching the righteousness that is in the law: For they being
ignorant of God's righteousness, go about to establish their own
righteousness, as reading, hearing sermons, prayers, public or
private, peaceableness with their neighbours, fasting, alms, good
works as they count them, just dealings, abstinence from the grosser
pollutions of the world, stricter obedience to the commandments
of the first and second table; all which with many other things
may be comprehended in their own righteousness, and it is grounded
on their ignorance, and goes on in rebellion; and such ignorant
persons shall in that day perish, not submitting through ignorance
to the righteousness of God, Romans 10:3 compared with Luke 19:27
where Christ saith, that when he shall come the second time, he
will command those his enemies, who submitted not themselves to
him, (who is called the righteousness of God (Isa 46:13)) or would
not have him to reign over them, to be slain before his face.

(4.) Those whose hearts are set upon the world, and follow the
alluring persuasions of it; the Lord calls such fools (Luke
12:20; Prov 7:7), who go after it (viz. the world, held forth by
a similitude of a woman with the attire of an harlot) as an ox
to the slaughter, or a fool to the correction of the stocks, till
a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hasteth to the snare,
and knoweth not that it is for his life: and knows not, mark, it
is through ignorance (v 23).

5. A fit end of Christ's coming, is, that his righteous ones might
shine as the sun in the glory, or kingdom of their father (Matt
13:43). There are many things that do hinder the people of God
from shining forth as the sun now.

As, They have a body of death, which makes them fetch many a groan
in their journey to Canaan (Rom 7:24; 2 Cor 5:2). They meet with
many a sad temptation, which also makes them in heaviness many a
time (1 Peter 1:6). They have also many other things that do hinder
their shining now; but then the body of death shall be left off.
My meaning is, that sin shall be no more in the natures of God's
people then: Their bodies that are now so vile, shall then be made
like unto the glorious body of the Son of God, 'Who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue
all things unto himself' (Phil 3:21).

6. Another end of Christ's coming shall be to take an account of
his children, how they have laid out their talents, that he hath
committed to their trust (Matt 25:19; Rom 14:12; 2 Cor 5:10).

7. Another end of his coming is, to set up his kingdom, which
will be glorious indeed at his appearing (2 Tim 4:1; Rom 8:19-21).
I do but touch these things, because I would hasten towards a
conclusion; many other things might have been spoken to, but at
this time I shall forbear.

But you will say, Who shall stand when he appears? Why, I told
you before, that 'the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment,
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous' (Psa 1:5). Let
him be close or profane, as I told you even now, all shall be laid
open, all shall be made manifest, all shall come into judgment.

Ah poor soul! It is not then thy brave words will save thee; it
is not thine eloquent tongue that will then do thee any good:
if thou be without the wedding garment, thou wilt be speechless,
as in Matthew 22:12. But thou that art a converted person, shalt
stand in the judgment; thou that art born again shalt enter into
the kingdom, and none else (John 3:5; Rev 21:27).

But how shall I know that I am born again?

(1.) Why, if thou art born again, then thou knowest that thou wast
not born a Christian at first (Eph 2:1-3). 'You hath he quickened,
who were dead in trespasses and sins.'

(2.) Thou knowest that once thou hadst no faith in the Lord Jesus;
and wert convinced of sin because thou didst not believe in the
Son of Mary (John 16:9).

(3.) Thou seest all true joy through the blood and righteousness
of the Son of Mary (1 Cor 15:57; Rom 7:25).

(4.) Art thou born again? Then thou canst not be quiet till thou
seest God smile, and lift up the light of his countenance upon
thee (2 Cor 4:6; Psa 4:6) and that through the face of the Son of
Mary, the Son of God.

(5.) Thou knowest that God hath given thee thy faith (Phil 1:29;
Eph 2:8).

(6.) Art thou born again? Then thou knowest that the doctrine of
the Son of Mary the Virgin, is a right doctrine (2 John 9).

(7.) Then also thou lookest for the personal appearing of the Son
of Mary from heaven in the clouds, the second time (Heb 9:28; Rev
1:7).

These things, though plain, yet if the Lord set them home upon
thy conscience, may be profitable both to thee and me. Therefore
let us examine the matter a little. And

Examine 1. Thou thinkest that thou art a Christian; thou shouldest
be sorry else: Well, But when did God shew thee that thou wert
no Christian? When didst thou see that: And in the light of the
Spirit of Christ, see that thou wert under the wrath of God because
of original sin? (Rom 5:12). Nay, dost thou know what original
sin means? Is it not the least in thy thoughts? And dost thou not
rejoice in secret, that thou art the same that thou ever wert? If
so, then know for certain that the wrath of God to this very day
abideth on thee (John 3:36). And if so, then thou art one of those
that will fall in the judgment, except thou art born again, and
made a new creature (2 Cor 5:17).

Exam. 2. Thou thinkest that thou hast been born again, ('tis well
if thou hast) but least thou shouldest deceive thy poor soul,
I pray thee consider, when did the Spirit of the Lord Jesus shew
thee, that thou hadst no faith in thee by nature? And when did
the Spirit of Christ convince thee of sin, because thou didst not
believe in him? It may be thou hast been convinced of sins against
the law, by the law, and thine own conscience, as the Pharisees
were (John 8:9; Rom 3:20). Ay, but when didst thou see thyself a
lost creature for want of faith in the son of Mary? If not, thou
hast not yet been savingly convinced by the Spirit of Christ; for
that, when it convinceth effectually of sin, it convinceth of
unbelief; though thou hast been never so much convinced of sins
against the law, if thou hast not seen thyself under the power
and dominion, guilt and punishment of sin, because thou didst not
believe in Christ, thou hast not yet been savingly convinced; for
that's one work of the Spirit to convince of sin, 'Because they
believe not on me,' saith Jesus the Son of Mary, who was espoused
to Joseph the carpenter: But on the contrary, dost thou not say
in thy heart, thou never hadst thy faith to seek, but hast always
believed with as good a faith as any one alive? If so, then know
for certain that thou hast no faith of the operation of God in
thee, according to God's ordinary working; and if so, then know,
that if the Son of Man should come to judge the world at this
moment of time, that thou with all thy faith (thou thinkest thou
hast) wouldst fall in the judgment (2 Thess 2:12).

Exam. 3. Art thou born again? Then thou seest that thy great sin
was want of faith in the Son of Mary. Then thou seest that it is
he that was sent of God to die for the sins of the world (John
1:29, 3:16-19; Acts 13:38,39) and that thou art complete in him,
without any works of the law (Rom 4:5), then thou rejoicest in
Christ Jesus, and puttest no confidence in the flesh (Phil 3:3)
yet thou rejoicest in the flesh and blood of the Son of Mary,
knowing that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink
indeed (John 6:55) out of which thou wouldest very willingly
make thy life all thy days; out of his birth, obedience, death,
resurrection, ascension, and glorious intercession, now at the
right hand of his Father (Heb 7:24,25), but if thou art wavering
in these things, know that thou art but a babe at the best, and
for ought thou knowest, God may cut thee off in thy unbelief, and
cast thee into utter darkness, where there shall be weeping and
wailing and gnashing of teeth.

Exam. 4. Art thou born again? Then thou seest all true peace and
joy comes through the blood of the Son of Mary, and his righteousness,
as in Romans 7:25 and 1 Corinthians 15:57, there are many poor
souls that are taken with raptures of joy, and false conceited
consolation (John 16:20) which doth come from the devil, and their
own deceitful hearts; but their joy shall be turned into mourning
and sorrow of heart (Luke 6:24,25), but thou that art a Christian
in deed, and not in word only, rejoicest in Christ Jesus the Son
of Mary; yea though now you see him not, yet believing, you rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory (1 Peter 1:8). And these
two things are the fruits of thy faith, and of thy joy.

(1.) The Lord Jesus Christ is very precious unto thee (1 Peter
2:7).

(2.) Thou dost purify thine heart by this faith, and the power of
the Spirit of Christ, which thou hast received into thy soul (Rom
8:13; Acts 15:9; John 3:3). But if thy guilt of sin goes off, and
convictions go off any other way than by the blood and righteousness
of the Man Christ Jesus, thy guilt goes off not right, but wrong,
and thy latter end will be a very bitter end without faith and
repentance; for it is his blood through which all true peace comes
(Col 1:20), and there is no other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we should be saved, but by the Lord Jesus of Nazareth
(Acts 4:10-12 compared together).

Exam. 5. Art thou born again? Then thou canst not be quiet till
thou doest see God lift up the light of his countenance upon thee;
yea, thou hast such a desire after the light of God's countenance,
that, all the glory, riches, honour, pleasure, profits, &c. of this
world will not satisfy, till thou doest see God to be a reconciled
Father to thee in the Lord Jesus Christ, as it is Psalm 4:6; John
14:8; Psalm 35:3. Then thou wilt not be quiet till thou dost hear
from the Son of Mary, which is the Lord of glory, such a voice as
this, Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee: And 'my
grace is sufficient for thee' (2 Cor 12:9; 1 Cor 2:8). But if thou
canst content thyself with anything below this, thou wilt, when
all comes to all, be found but a rotten-hearted professor, who
will have thy portion among the slothful ones, who will fall in
the judgment of the Son of Man, when he comes in flaming fire with
his mighty angels (2 Thess 1:8).

Exam. 6. Art thou born again? Then thou knowest that God hath given
thee thy faith that thou hast in his Son: Then thou art to say
through grace, there was a time in which I had no faith; there was
a time in which I could not believe in the Son of God for eternal
life. 'But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith
he loved us, even when we were dead in sins [and unbelief; which
is the greatest;] hath quickened us together with Christ, by grace
ye are saved' (Eph 2:4,5), 'through faith' (v 8).

Exam. 7. Art thou born again? Then thou knowest that the doctrine
of the Son of God, the Son of Mary, is a right doctrine, which is
this:

That the Son of God which was with his Father before the world
was (John 1:1, 17:5) came into the world in the fulness of time,
and was made in the likeness of man (Phil 2:7) being made of
a woman or virgin, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law (Gal 4:4). And that was done in this wise. What the
law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh; that is,
through our flesh; God sending his own Son in likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that is, condemned
him in the flesh for the sins of poor sinners: For this, compare
Romans 8:3; 2 Corinthians 5:21 with Galatians 3:13 and it will
appear clearly to be the truth of God: Also, that this Son of
God, which is the true God, as well as the Son of Mary, did bear
our sins in his own body on the tree (1 Peter 2:24) and did spill
his own blood, which is also the blood of God (Acts 20:28), that
he died, and was laid in Joseph's sepulchre (John 19:38-42) and rose
again the third day (Acts 10:40), that very Man (Luke 24:39-45),
and ascended up into heaven in a cloud (Acts 1:9-11) and there
ever lives to make intercession for us, that very man (Heb 7:24,25,
8:3, 10:12).

Exam. 8. And in the last place, If thou art a Christian, then
thou lookest for that very Jesus again, whom the Jews did crucify
(John 19), whom God raised again, as it is 1 Thessalonians 1:10.
I say, thou lookest, thou waitest, thou hasteneth after the coming
of this Lord Jesus, which doth deliver thee from the wrath to come
(2 Peter 3:10-12; Heb 9:26-28; 1 Thess 1:10). Yea, thou knowest,
that this very man shall so come in like manner, as his disciples
did see him go into heaven, which was a very man (Luke 24:39
compared with vv 50,51 of the same chapter). Yea, in a cloud he
went away from his disciples, and in the clouds he shall come again
(Rev 1:7) to judge all that are in their graves (John 5:28,29;
Dan 12:2) and shall receive all that look for, and love his second
coming, to himself (Heb 9:27,28). And they shall be for ever with
him (1 Thess 4:16,17). But the wicked shall be cast into eternal
damnation (Matt 25:46). These things, I say, if thou be a Christian
indeed, thou believest, and ownest, and the faith of them doth
purify thy heart (1 John 3:3) and wean thee from this world, and
the things thereof; and if it is not from this principle; that is,
if thy obedience do not flow from this faith, which is the faith
of God's elect, as I have proved at large, thy obedience, thy zeal,
thy self-denial, thy holiness, righteousness; yea, all that thou
canst do, is but sin in the sight of the great God of heaven and
earth (Heb 11:6; Rom 14:23). For all true sanctification comes
through the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, by the operation of
the Spirit of God (1 Cor 6:11). 'But ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God.' And (Cant 1:3), 'Thy name is as
ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.'

Well then, seeing this is a truth of so great concernment, I beseech
you, seek to be thoroughly rooted into it by faith. And that thou
mayest so be, examine thy heart; yea, beg of God to help thee
to examine it, and to throw out all that fancy that thou takest
instead of faith; also throw away all thine own wisdom; yea, thy
own righteousness also, and come to God in the name of the Son of
Mary, which is the Son of God, and beg faith of him, true faith,
the faith of the operation of God; such a faith as he gives to his
own elect, which will shew thee clearly of these things; so that
thou shalt not deceive thyself with a fancy of them; and the
advantages will be many.

Advantage 1. It will comfort thy heart against persecutions,
temptations, and cross providences, as also James saith to his
persecuted brethren; 'Be patient [my brethren, saith he], stablish
your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh' (John 5:8).

Advantage 2. It will through grace, wean thy heart and affections
abundantly from this world, and the things therein. 'Who is
he that overcometh the world, [saith John] but he that believeth
that Jesus is the Son of God?' (1 John 5:5). Who is he also that
purifies his heart, but he that looketh for the second coming of
Christ from heaven to judge the world? as in 1 John 3:3 compared
with 2 Peter 3:10, 11.

Advantage 3. Hereby thou wilt be able to judge of all doctrines
whatsoever, though they come never so nigh the truth, yet if
they be not indeed the very truth, thou wilt find them and their
doctrine liars (Rev 2:2; 1 Cor 2:15).

Advantage 4. If thou beest thoroughly set down in this doctrine,
even in the faith of this doctrine which I have held forth unto
thee, thou wilt not be taken with any other doctrine whatsoever.
What is the reason I pray you, that there are so many giddy-headed
professors in these days, that do stagger to and fro like a company
of drunkards, but this, They were never sealed in the doctrine of
the Father, and the Son? They were never enabled to believe that
that child that was born of the virgin Mary, was the mighty God
(Isa 9:6). No, saith Christ, he that is built upon this rock,
(meaning the faith of himself, which is to believe that the son
of Mary is the Christ of God (Matt 16:16)) the gates of hell shall
not prevail against him (v 18).

Advantage 5. The faith of this doctrine, will make thee labour in
the work of God in the world. Oh, it will liven thy heart in the
work of the Lord; especially, if thou livest in the faith of thy
interest in Christ, it will make thee labour to be found watching
when thy Lord shall return from the wedding; that when he doth
come, thou mayest open to him immediately (Luke 12:35,36).

Now seeing the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ is so nigh, even
at the doors, what doth this speak to all sorts of people (under
heaven) but this?

Admonition 1. First, to see whether they have oil in their lamps
or not; that is, to search and see, whether the Spirit of the Man
Christ Jesus be in them or no; for he that hath not the Spirit of
Christ in him, is none of Christ's (Rom 8:9). Thou that hast not
the Spirit of Christ in thee, why, at that day (let thy profession
be what it will) he will say to thee, Depart, I know you not
(Matt 25), and if so, then thy latter end will be worse than thy
beginning, as in 2 Peter 2:20.

Admonition 2. Then what will become of all the profane, ignorant,
scoffers, self-righteous, proud, bastard-professors in the world?
If the children of God shall 'scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly, and the sinner appear?' (1 Peter 4:18).

Admonition 3. Then what will become of all those that creep into
the society of God's people without a wedding garment on? Why, it
will be said unto them, Friends, how came you hither? Take them,
and bind them hand and foot, and cast them into utter darkness;
'There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth' (Matt 22:11-13).

Admonition 4. Then what will become of all those that mock at
the second coming of the Man Christ, as do the Ranters, Quakers,
drunkards, and the like? Why read their doom in Matthew 24:50,
51, 'The Lord of that or these servants, shall come in a day when
they look not for him, and in an hour that they are not aware of,
and shall cut them asunder, and appoint them their portion with the
hypocrites,' And 'there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'

Admonition 5. Then what doth this speak to the Lord's own people?
Surely this, that they should be in a watchful posture (Mark
13:37).

(1.) Watch therefore over your own hearts, least they should be
over-charged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of
this life, and so that day come upon you unawares; for as a snare
shall it come upon all the dwellers upon the face of the earth,
as it is in Luke 31:34-36.

(2.) Watch over the devil's temptations. Oh, have a care in the
first place, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve,
so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ: And the rather, because at this day he is very busy with
his doctrines, and his ministers; trying all ways, if by any means
he might deceive you with fair speeches, and enticing carriages;
what a fair shew in the flesh, yet denying the Lord, and refusing
to be justified by the blood of Jesus the Son of Mary, the Son of
God. Watch I say over the devil touching doctrines, for he labours
as much this way as any way, for he knows that if he can but get
you to lay a rotten foundation, he is sure of you, live as godly
in your conceit as you will, and therefore, it is worth your
observation, in that 24th of Matthew when Christ is speaking of
the signs of his coming, he breaks forth with a warning word to
his disciples, to beware of false teachers (v 4). The very first
words that he answers to a question that his disciples put to him
is this, 'Take heed that no man deceive you.' Again (v 11), 'And
many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.' And
(v 24) he saith again, 'For there shall [come or] arise, false
Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders;
insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very
elect.'

(3.) Take heed that he doth not deceive you in point of worship,
that he make you not slight any of the ordinances of God; for if
he do, he will quickly make way for another temptation.

(4.) Take heed also that you have not your lamps to trim when the
bridegroom comes; if you have, you may peradventure be ashamed and
blush before him at his coming (1 John 2:28). Therefore content
not yourselves with a profession of Christ, and no more, for the
devil may deceive, yea, doth deceive a professing people many
times. And if he will deceive a professing generation, he must
come in this manner: Under the name of Christ. With a fair shew
in the flesh of outward holiness (Gal 6:12). He must come 'with
good words and fair speeches' (Rom 16:18). Now though he come to
drunkards, swearers, whore mongers, thieves, liars, murderers,
and covetous persons, in his black colours; yet if he will come to
deceive a professing party, he must appear like an angel of light
(2 Cor 11:14). And the reason why souls are deceived by him in
these his appearances, is, because they are not able to distinguish
betwixt the law and the gospel, the convictions of conscience by
the law only, and convictions by the Spirit, but do (though they
profess the Lord Jesus) give ear to every wind of doctrine, and
being unstable, as Peter saith, do fall into the temptations of
the devil, in wresting the scriptures to their own destruction (2
Peter 3:16).

Admonition 6. In a word, you that have not yet laid hold on the
Lord Jesus Christ, for eternal life, lay hold upon him; upon his
righteousness, blood, resurrection, ascension, intercession, and
wait for his second coming to 'judge the world in righteousness'
(Acts 17:31). And you that have laid hold, I say to you, lay
faster hold on your Lord Jesus, 'Who hath ears to hear, let him
hear' (Matt 13:43).

Now, that thou mayest the more clearly understand my faith in the
doctrines of God's dear Son, I have thought good to hold forth
again the doctrine of the former treatise by way of question and
answer, as followeth.

Quest. Seeing there are many false Christs gone out into the world,
according as was prophesied of in former times by the Lord himself
(Matt 24:5,23). And seeing (if we be saved) we must be saved by
a Christ; for he that misses of him (saith the scriptures) cannot
be saved, because there is no way to come to the Father but by
him, as it is written (John 14:6; Acts 4:12). How therefore, is
the knowledge of the true Christ to be attained unto, that we may
be saved by him?

Ans. Indeed to know Christ, (God's Christ) is as the scripture
saith, the one thing necessary (Luke 10:42), without which all
other things will avail nothing: And therefore I shall according
to the scriptures, (1.) Tell you what God's Christ is. And, (2.)
How the knowledge of him is attained unto. And therefore, God's
Christ is true God, and true man. That he is true God, is manifest
by that scripture, in Isaiah 9:6 where it is said, 'unto us a
child is born, unto us a Son is given: and the government shall
be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace.' Also 1 John 5:20. And we are in him that is true, (saith
the apostle) even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God,
and eternal life. See Hebrews 1:8; John 1:12; Romans 9:5; John
20:28. That he is true man, see again (Isa 9:6) where it is said,
'Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given'; and compare
it with Matthew 1:21 where it is said, 'And she shall bring forth
a Son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS: for he shall save his
people from their sins,' see John 1:14, 'And the word was made
flesh.' (1 Tim 3:16) 'God was manifest in the flesh.' These two
scriptures are expounded by Hebrews 2:14 where it is said, 'Forasmuch
then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same'; that is, of flesh and
blood, see Romans 8:3 and compare it with Luke 24:39 where Christ
saith, 'Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle
me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have.' And he doth often call himself by the name of the Son of
man to signify that he is very man, as well as very God (Matt 24,
16:13).

Quest. But why was he true God and true man?

Ans. He was true man, because man had offended, and justice
required that man should suffer and make satisfaction, and so it
is written (1 Cor 15:21). 'For since by man came death, by man
came also the resurrection of the dead.' And again, 'All we like
sheep have gone astray;--and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity
of us all.' And in 1 Peter 2:24 where that 53rd of Isaiah is
mentioned, he saith, 'Who his own self bare our sins in his own
body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto
righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed.' And again, God
did prepare this body, the human nature of Christ, that it should
be a sacrifice for sins, 'wherefore--he saith, Sacrifice and
offering [that is, such as were offered by the law of Moses] thou
wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me' (Heb 10:5). In the
body which God had prepared for him, which he took of the virgin
(Gal 4:4) in this he did bear all the sins of all his elect (1
Peter 2:24).

And he must needs be true God, because, it was an infinite God
that was transgressed against, and justice required an infinite
satisfaction, and therefore he must be infinite that must give
this satisfaction, or else justice could not be satisfied, and so
it was written, where the apostle is telling the pastors of the
church of Ephesus, by what they were redeemed, he tells them,
that God did purchase them 'with his own blood' (Acts 20:28). See
1 John 3:16 where he saith, 'Hereby perceive we the love of God,
because he laid down his life for us.' Not in his divine, but in
his human nature; for as I said before, God's Christ was of both
natures (Rom 9:5; 1 John 5:20; John 1:1-14). True God, and true
man, and the divine nature did enable him to undergo in his human
nature, all that sin, curse, and wrath that was laid upon him for
us; and to overcome, and obtain eternal redemption for us (Heb
9:24).

Quest. How did this Christ bring in redemption for man?

Ans. (1.) Why first, man broke the law of God; but this man did
fulfil it again, and became the end of it 'for righteousness to
every one that believeth' (Rom 10:4).

(2.) Man was foiled and overcome by the devil; but this Man Christ
did overcome him again, and that for us (Luke 4; Heb 2:14,15).

(3.) Man did lose the glory of God, but this Man hath obtained it
again.

(4.) Man by sin lost eternal salvation; but this Man by his own
blood hath obtained it again for him (Heb 9:12).

(5.) Man by sin brought death into the world (Rom 5:12). But Jesus
Christ, that Man, hath destroyed it again (Heb 2:14 compared with
Hosea 13:14) and brought in life and immortality (2 Tim 1:10; Rom
5:15).

Quest. But how are we justified by this man's obedience?

Ans. All our iniquities were laid upon him (Isa 53:6,8,11,12).
And his righteousness is bestowed on us, if we believe, as it is
written, 'Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus
Christ unto all and upon all them that believe' (Rom 3:22). And
this is it which Paul so much sought after, when he saith, 'Yea
doubtless, and I count all things but loss,--and do count them
but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith' (Phil 3:8,9).

Quest. How do men come by this righteousness and everlasting life?

Ans. By faith men lay hold upon it, and apply it to their own souls
in particular (Gal 2:20). For it is by faith they are justified,
as also saith the scripture (Rom 5:1). That his faith lays hold
on and applies, that which this Christ of God hath done, and is
a doing, and owns it as his own.

Quest. What is this faith that doth justify the sinner?

Ans. It is a gift (Eph 2:8), fruit (Gal 5:22) or work, of the
Spirit of God, whereby a soul is enabled, under a sight of its
sins, and wretched estate, to lay hold on the birth, righteousness,
blood, death, resurrection, ascension and intercession of the Lord
Jesus Christ (1 Thess 2:7), and by the assistance of the Spirit,
whereby it is wrought, to apply all the virtue, life and merit of
what hath been done and suffered, or is a doing by the same Lord
Jesus Christ, to its own self in particular (Gal 2:20; Rom 7:24,25),
as if itself had really done all that the Lord Jesus Christ hath
done: I do not say that the soul doth any thing for justification,
but it doth know, that whatsoever Jesus Christ hath done in point
of justification, is given to, and bestowed upon it (Rom 3:22) and
God finding the soul in him, that is in Christ, doth 'justify it
from all things, from which it could not be justified by the law
of Moses' (Acts 13:39).

Quest. Well, but is there no way to come to the Father of mercies
but by this man that was born of the virgin? Is there no way to
come to God but by the faith of him?

Ans. No, 'there is none other name under heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved' (Acts 4:12). And Jesus himself, that
was born of the virgin Mary, said, 'I am the way, and the truth,
and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me' (John
14:6).

Quest. And where is this man, that was born of the virgin, that
we may come to the Father by him?

Ans. He ascended away from his disciples in a cloud, into heaven,
as we may read (Acts 1:9-11).

Quest. What doth he there?

Ans. He ever lives to make intercession for all that come unto
God by him (Heb 7:25). That is, they shall come out of themselves
to him, and venture their souls on what he did and suffered when
he was on earth, and is doing now in heaven; shall certainly be
saved: For he ever lives to save them, that do thus come to the
Father by him. And it is, because he spilt his blood for all that
shall by the faith of God's elect lay hold upon him. And thus it
is written where he saith, 'Being justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, [Mark this] whom
God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness, [that is, to declare God's
righteousness] for the remission of sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him
which believeth [or layeth hold] in Jesus' (Rom 3:24-26).

Quest. But did this man rise again from the dead, that very man,
with that very body wherewith he was crucified? for you do seem,
as I conceive, to hold forth so much by these your expressions.

Ans. Why do you doubt of it?

Quest. Do you believe it?

Ans. Yes, by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, for he hath enabled
me so to do.

Quest. And can you prove it by the scripture?

Ans. Yes.

Quest. How?

Ans. First, From that scripture in Luke 24:39, 40 where Christ
himself after he was crucified appeared to his disciples, (who
having seen him) supposed they had seen a spirit. But he said, Why
are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold
my hands and my feet, that it is I myself, and do not think you
see a spirit; handle me, and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones, as you see me have. This he spake after he was crucified
(Luke 23:33) and buried (v 53) and rose again from the dead (24:6,7),
many other scriptures could I give for the proof hereof, as Acts
10:40, 41. And Acts 13:30, 31; 1 Thessalonians 1:10. Only read Acts
2:29-32 where the apostle proveth the same, bringing in the words
of the prophet David for a testimony thereof, saying, He 'being a
prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that
of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise
up Christ to sit on his throne; [saith] he seeing this before,
spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left
in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption.' Mark it, his flesh
did see no corruption (v 31). But if he had not risen again, his
flesh had seen corruption. But he rose again from the dead, that
very man, that very body; for his flesh did see no corruption.

Quest. Why did he rise again from the dead, with that very body?

Ans. (1.) Because it was not possible he should be holden of death.

(2.) Because in his human nature he suffered for sin; and if he
had not recovered himself from that very curse, even from under
death, and all other things that lay on him, which he had through
the sins of his children subjected himself unto, he had not overcome
sin, hell, death, the law, and the devil (Acts 2:24): but had been
overcome by them; and if so, then had not redemption been obtained
for sinners; for it was at his resurrection from the dead, that God
said unto him, 'Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee':
(As saith the Apostle) 'And we declare unto you glad tidings,
how that the promise which was made unto the fathers, God hath
fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath raised
up Jesus again'; as it is also written in the second psalm, 'Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee' (Acts 13:30-36). And
it is this, namely, the resurrection of that Man from the dead,
that doth give us ground of hope; as in 1 Peter 1:3 where he saith,
He 'hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead.'

(3.) Because God intends to redeem the bodies of his saints out
of their graves in which they have lain many a year (John 5:28,29;
Rom 8:23; 1 Cor 15:52) and to possess them with his own glory; and
when this comes to pass, then shall that scripture be fulfilled,
that saith, He 'shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working
[of his mighty power] whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself' (Phil 2:21). And he hath given us assurance
thereof, in that he hath raised up Jesus our Lord again from the
dead (Acts 17:31).

Quest. But do you think, that these our bodies that we do carry
about with us in this world, after that they are dead and buried,
and rotten, shall rise again out of those graves into which they
are laid; when the scripture saith, flesh and blood shall not
inherit the kingdom of God? (1 Cor 15:50).

Ans. Flesh in scripture is taken more ways than one: As,

It is taken for the works of the law; where the Apostle saith,
'Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing
of faith? Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye
now made perfect by the flesh?' (Gal 3:2,3). By flesh here, he
means the law; as is clear, if you compare it with verses 10-12.
Again, sometimes flesh is taken for sins (Rom 8:1,5). And sometimes
it is taken for the bodies of the saints, as subject to distempers,
to pain, sickness, corruptions, to death; by reason of sin (2 Cor
4:11, 7:5). Now the Apostle in that place, where he saith, 'Flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom [of heaven, or] of God,' his
meaning is, sinful flesh and blood, or the sin, with any imperfection
that is in the bodies of the saints, shall not inherit the kingdom;
and that you shall find to be the mind of the Holy Ghost, if you
read with understanding the latter end of the same verse, where
he saith, 'Neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.' That is,
sin, or any imperfection of the body, shall not inherit eternal
life; for, saith he, in verse 53, 'This corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.' Mark here,
I pray you, though he saith, 'Flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God'; yet he saith, 'This corruptible must put on
incorruption.' For the trump shall blow, and the dead shall be
raised (as Christ saith) 'They that are in the graves shall hear
his voice' (John 5:28). And shall come forth of their grave incorruptible
(1 Cor 15:52). And shall 'all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ' (2 Cor 5:10; Rev 2:12,13). See also that scripture (Phil
3:20,21) where the Apostle saith, He waited for Christ the Saviour
from heaven. And what shall he do when he comes? why, He 'shall
change our vile body.' Mark it, it must be our vile body that must
be changed. But if it be changed, then how can it be the same? not
the same in respect of sin, or bodily infirmities, but the very
same in respect of substance: For, saith he, It is our vile body
that must be changed; and it is the very same, It shall be 'fashioned
like unto his glorious body.' And if you ask, How is it possible
that this should be done? He answers, 'According to the working
whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.'

Quest. But do you think this is certain? methinks the scriptures
seemingly hold forth so much, yet I cannot believe it, for it is
contrary to all reason.

Ans. Truly the scriptures do not only hold forth so much seemingly,
but they do most really, and plainly, hold out these things to
all those that have received the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ.
For it is it, and it alone, that can reveal these things. 'For
the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God' (1 Cor
2:11). Now if thou wouldest know these things, thou must first
receive the Spirit of the Son of God, without which, thou canst
not know so much as one of the fundamental truths of the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Quest. But there are those in our days, who reject this doctrine
that you lay down, concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, as you lay
it down, and they are for a Christ within, for a cross within, for
a resurrection, and intercession within; and they do not hold as
you do, a Christ without, and a resurrection of Christ without;
and intercession of Christ without; Ay, and they have very much
scripture for that which they say too: And therefore what shall
such as we do, that stand tottering and shaking in these distracted
and dangerous times? For our poor souls are in very much doubt
what way to take.

Ans. Therefore I will speak a few words to you by way of discovery
of the falsity of such opinions; and a word of direction, how you
should understand the truth.

Therefore, he that cries up a Christ within, in opposition to a
Christ without, that man instead of having the Spirit of Christ in
him, is possessed with a spirit of delusion; for where the Spirit
of Christ is in truth, that Spirit causeth the soul to look to the
Christ that was born of the Virgin, for all justification; as it
is written, 'Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he
will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself;
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will
shew you things to come,' mark the next verse, 'He [saith the Son
of the Virgin] shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you'
(John 16:13,14). He shall take of mine; What is that? Why surely
it is, he shall take of my Godhead, my humanity, my birth, my
righteousness, my blood, my death, my resurrection, my ascension
and intercession, my kingly, priestly, and prophetical offices,
and shall shew you the life, merit, and value of them. And this
was it which was revealed to Paul by the Holy Spirit, here spoken
of (1 Cor 15:1-8). 'Moreover brethren, [saith he] I declare unto
you the gospel which I preached unto you, which also ye have
received, and wherein ye stand; By which also ye are saved, if ye
keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed
in vain.' But what is this doctrine? why, 'I delivered unto you
first of all that which I also received.' What was that? Why,
'How that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures;
And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day
according to the scriptures: [there is his death and resurrection
preached]. And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve;
after that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once;
of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are
fallen asleep. After that, he was seen of James; then of all the
Apostles. And last of all he was seen of me also, [saith Paul] as
of one born out of due time.' This is it, I say, that the Spirit
of Truth doth hold forth to poor sinners, a Christ crucified
without the gates of Jerusalem (Luke 23:33), buried in Joseph's
sepulchre (53), risen again the third day (Luke 24:6) ascended
away from his disciples in a cloud into heaven, as in Acts 1:9-11.
And there ever liveth, that very man, with that very body, to make
intercession for all that receive him (Heb 7:24,25). This is, I
say, the doctrine of the Spirit of truth, whatsoever is the spirit
of error.

Quest. But do not the scriptures make mention of a Christ within?
(2 Cor 13:5; Col 1:27).

Ans. Yes, And he that hath not the Spirit of Christ, is none of
his (Rom 8:9). But he that hath it, is led out of himself by it;
and as I said before, it shews the soul, what the blessed Son
of the Virgin Mary hath done and suffered, and is a doing for
it. Therefore hereby know we the Spirit of truth from the spirit
of error (2 John 7). 'Every spirit that doth confess that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God' (1 John 4:2). That is,
that spirit that doth confess, that Jesus Christ took flesh upon
him and in that flesh did bear our sins (1 Peter 2:24; Col 1:20-22;
1 Peter 3:18, 4:1). And after he was taken down from the cross,
and laid in a sepulchre, rose again from the dead; that very Man
with that very body, wherewith he was crucified: That spirit that
doth believe and confess this, is of God, and is the blessed Spirit
of Christ, whereof he spake, when he was yet with his disciples
touching his bodily presence: For 'he [saith the Son of Mary]
shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and shew it unto
you' (John 16:13,14).

I have answered this already in my epistle to the first treatise.
Therefore believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they
be of God, for many false spirits and prophets are gone out into
the world, therefore have a care how thou receivest the voice that
speaks to thee, but try whether they are according to the truth
of God's word as it is written, 'To the law and to the testimony:
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them' (Isa 8:20).

(1.) Therefore try a little, Do they slight God's Christ, which
is the Son of the Virgin? that spirit is of the devil (1 Cor 12:3).

(2.) Do they say that that blood of his which was shed without
the gates of Jerusalem, doth not wash away sin, yea, all sin from
him that believes? That is a spirit of antichrist (1 John 1:7).

(3.) Do they say, that that Man that was crucified without the gates
of Jerusalem, is not risen again (with that very body wherewith
he was crucified) out of the sepulchre? (Luke 24:38,39). That is
a spirit of antichrist.

(4.) Do they say that that very Man that was crucified with that
very body, is not now in the presence of his Father, absent from
his people touching his bodily presence, though present in Spirit?
I say whoever they be, that say he is not there, they are of the
devil: for the proof of this see Acts 5:30 and 31 and compare it
with Hebrews 7:24, 25. 'The God of our fathers [saith the Apostle]
raised up Jesus.' But what Jesus? 'he whom ye slew,' saith he to
the Jews. 'Him [the very same whom ye slew] hath God exalted with
his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.'

And indeed, here is my LIFE, namely, the birth of this Man, the
righteousness of this Man, the blood of this Man, the death and
resurrection of this Man, the ascension and intercession of this
Man for me; and the second coming of this Man to judge the world
in righteousness (Acts 17:31). I say, here is my LIFE, if I see
this by faith without me, through the operation of the Spirit within
me: I am safe, I am at peace, I am comforted, I am encouraged,
and I know that my comfort, peace, and encouragement is true, and
given me from heaven, by the Father of mercies, through the Son
of the Virgin Mary (Matt 1:21) who is the way to the Father of
mercies (John 14:6), who is able to save to the uttermost, all
that come to the Father by him (Heb 7:25). Because he, that very
Man, with that very body wherewith he was crucified, is ascended
into heaven (Acts 1:9-11), and there ever lives to make intercession
for them that come to God by him. This is the rock, sinner, upon
which, if thou be built, the gates of hell, nor Ranter, Quaker,
sin, law, death, no nor the devil himself, shall ever be able to
prevail against thee (Matt 16:16-18). And here I leave thee to the
wisdom of the great God, who if he hath chosen thee in his Son,
and brought thee to him; and hath made thee by faith to lay hold
on him, thou needest not fear the devil with his siftings, snares,
wiles, and fiery darts, wherewith he doth destroy thousands; but
mayest with the Apostle (if thou live in the power and life of the
love of God towards thee) cry out, 'I am persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord' (Rom 8:38,39).

And now reader, if thou be a true Christian, I am sure that these
be the things that appear to be the glorious substantial truths
to thy soul, and thou doest not care for that comfort that doth
not make this Man, the Son of the Virgin, precious to thy soul (1
Peter 2:7) for thou knowest, that it is he, that hath delivered
thee from the wrath to come (1 Thess 1:10). But as for you that
are disobedient, except you mend your manners, you will stumble
'and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken' (Isa
28:13) and wonder and perish because you believe not (Acts 13:41).

A few words more, and so I shall have done, and they are words of
counsel to thee. Have a care thou receive not every Christ that
is proffered to thee, though it may appear very excellent to thy
foolish heart: for under the name Christ, are men deceived, as
it is written, 'many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ;
and shall deceive many' (Matt 24:5). But have a care that thou
receive that Christ, that was born without thee, fulfilled the law
in his human nature without thee; spilt his blood without thee,
is risen again and ascended without thee, and maketh intercession
without thee: And that he that very Man that was born of the virgin,
will come again in the clouds without thee; and this truth must
thou receive by that Spirit that he hath promised to send and
give to them that ask him: And that shall dwell in thy heart, and
shall shew thee what the Son of Mary the virgin, the Son of man,
the Son of God, the true God hath in his body done for thy soul
(John 16:13,14). And if thou receive him in truth, then though
thou do not boast, nor brag of thy holiness, as those painted
hypocrites called Quakers do: yet thou wilt do more work for God
in one hour, than they, even all of them, can do in all their
lifetime.

Take my counsel, and the Lord Jesus Christ have mercy upon thy
soul and body. Farewell.



SOME QUESTIONS TO THE QUAKERS, OR A FEW QUERIES TO THOSE WHO ARE
POSSESSED WITH A SPIRIT OF DELUSION IN THIS GENERATION.

'Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a
reason of the hope that is in you,' (1 Peter 3:15). And I beseech
you do it in sincerity.

1. If thou sayest that every one hath a measure of the Spirit
of Jesus Christ within him, why say the scriptures that some are
'sensual having not the Spirit' (Jude 19). And when Christ tells
his disciples of sending them the Spirit, he also saith, The world
cannot receive it (John 14:17).

2. What is the church of God redeemed by, from the curse of the
law? Is it by something that is done within them, or by something
done without them? If thou answer, it is redeemed from the curse
of the law by something that worketh in them; then I ask, why did
the Man Christ Jesus hang upon the cross on Mount Calvary, without
the gates of Jerusalem, for the sins of the people? (Gal 3:3; 1
Peter 2:24). And why do the scriptures say, that through this Man,
is preached to us the forgiveness of sins (Acts 13:38). That is,
through his blood (Eph 1:7; Col 1:20) which was shed without the
gates of Jerusalem (Heb 13:12).

3. What scripture have you to prove, that Christ is, or was crucified
within you, dead within you, risen within you, and ascended within
you?

4. Is that very Man that was crucified on Mount Calvary between
two thieves, whose name is Jesus, the Son of Mary, I say, is he
the very Christ of God, yea, or no?

5. Is that very Man, with that very body, within you, yea, or no?

6. Was that Jesus, that was born of the Virgin Mary, a real Man
of flesh and bones, after his resurrection from the dead, out of
Joseph's sepulchre, yea, or no? For the scripture saith he was,
as in Luke 24:39. If so, then did that Man that said handle me
and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have;
I say, did that Man go away from his disciples (and not into them,
in his body) as these scriptures declare (Luke 24:39,40 compared
with 50,51, also Acts 1:9-11) or did he with that body of flesh
go into his disciples, as some fond dreamers think?

7. Hath that Christ that was with God the Father before the world
was, no other body but his church? If you say no, as it is your
wonted course; then again I ask you, what that was in which he
did bear the sins of his children? If you answer, It was 'in his
own body on the tree,' for so saith the scripture (1 Peter 2:24).
Then I ask you further, whether that body in which he did bear our
sins, (which is also called his own body) was, or is, the church
of God, yea, or no? Again if you say he hath no body but the
church, the saints, Then I ask, what that was that was taken down
from the cross, and laid into Joseph's sepulchre (Luke 23:53).

Now I know, that as Christ is the head of his church, so the church
is the body of the head, which is Christ. But as Christ is the
mediator between God and man, I say, as he is mediator, so he is
a man (1 Tim 2:5) and absent from his saints in the world, as is
clear (2 Cor 5:6). Therefore as he is a mediator, and a Man, so he
hath a body that is absent from his church, which body is ascended
from his disciples, above the clouds into heaven (Luke 24:51;
Acts 1:9-11). If you say no, then I ask you, Did he leave the
body behind him, which was born of the Virgin Mary, which walked
up and down with his disciples in the world, was afterwards hanged
upon the cross (Luke 23:26,33,53), buried, rose again from the dead
(Matt 24:3,6,15,41,41,39,50) with which body he did eat, drink,
and likewise walk with his disciples after his resurrection from
the dead (Acts 10:41), and did bid his disciples see if he were
not flesh and bones, yea, or no?

JOHN BUNYAN



FOOTNOTES:

1. Bunyan quotes this passage from the Genevan or Puritan version.--Ed.

2. 'Overly,' carelessly, negligently, inattentively.--Ed.

3. 'Close,' secret, not disclosed.--Ed.

***

A VINDICATION of GOSPEL TRUTHS OPENED,

ACCORDING TO THE SCRIPTURES;

AND THE OPPOSITION MADE AGAINST IT BY EDWARD BORROUGH, A PROFESSED
QUAKER, BUT PROVED AN ENEMY TO THE TRUTH, EXAMINED AND CONFUTED
BY THE WORD OF GOD,

AND ALSO,

The Things that were then laid down, and declare to the World by
me, are a second Time borne witness to, according to truth: With
the Answer of Edward Borrough to the Queries then laid down in my
Book reproved. And also, a plain answer to his Queries, given in
Simplicity of Soul; and is now also presented to the World, or
who else may read, or hear them; to the end (if God will ) that
Truth may be discovered thereby.

"I have found David...a man after mine own heart," (saith God,
Acts 13:22)

"Of his man's seed hath God according to his promise raised unto
Israel a Saviour, Jesus:" (saith the Apostle verse 23).

"And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took
him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulchre:" (verse 29).

"But God raised him from the dead:" (verse 30).

"And we declare unto you glad tidings how that the Promise which
was made unto the fathers, God hath fulfilled the same unto us
their children, in that he hath raised up Jesus again;" (verse
32, 33).

"Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through
this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins:" (verse
38).

"And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from
which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses." (verse 39).

TO THE READER.

Since it hath please the Lord to work in my soul by his holy Spirit,
and hath translated me in some measure from darkness to light, I
have seen and heard, that such things have been done by those who
did once pretend themselves to be the servants of Jesus Christ,
that it hath made me marvel: Partly, while I have beheld the vile
conversation of some, and also the seeming legal holiness of others,
together with their damnable doctrine; which have, notwithstanding
their professions, made shipwreck of the faith, both to themselves,
and their followers. I having had some in-sight into such things
as these, was provoked to publish a small treatise touching the
fundamentals of religion, supposing that God might add his blessing
thereto, both for the establishing of some, and the convincing of
others; which things I doubt not but they have been accomplished;
and will be still more and more. But, as it was in former days,
so it is now: That is, some in all former ages have been on foot
in the world, ready to oppose the truth: So it is now, there are
certain men newly started up in our days, called Quakers, who have
set themselves against the truth of our Lord Jesus Christ, and do
in very deed deny, that salvation was then obtained by him, when
he did hang on the cross without Jerusalem's gate. Now these men
do pretend, that they do verily and truly profess the Lord Jesus
Christ; but when it comes to the trial, and their principles be
thoroughly weighed, the best that they do, is to take one truth,
and corrupt it, that they may thereby fight more stoutly against
another. As for instance:

FIRST, They will own that salvation was obtained by Christ, this
is truth, that salvation was obtained by Christ; But come close
to the thing, and you will find, that they corrupt the word, and
only mean thus much, That salvation is wrought out by Christ as
he is within; and by it (though not warranted by the scripture)
they will fight against the truth: Namely, that salvation was
obtained for sinners, by the man that did hang on the cross on
Mount Calvary, between two thieves, called Jesus Christ. I say,
by what he did then for sinners in his own person or body, which
he took from the Virgin Mary, according to the word of God.

SECOND, They will own the doctrine of Christ within. This is truth,
that Christ is within his saints: But this doctrine they will take
to fight against the doctrine of Christ without, ascended from his
disciples into heaven, by whom salvation was obtained, "neither
is there salvation in any other" (Acts 4:12).

THIRD, They will won the resurrection of the saints, but their
meaning is only thus much, That the saints are raised from the
state of nature to a state of grace, and herewith they will fight
against this truth; namely, the resurrection of the bodies of saints
out of their graves, into which they were laid, some thousands,
some hundreds of years before. And if they do say, they do own the
resurrection of the saints out of their graves, they so mean out
of the grave of sin only, and nothing else.

FOURTH, They will say, they do own the second coming of Christ to
judge the world; but search them to the bottom, and you will find
them only to own him in his coming in spirit, within, in opposition
to the glorious coming of the Lord Jesus, the Son of Mary, from
heaven in the clouds, with all his mighty angels, to raise the
dead, and bring them to judgment, according to the scripture. And
so for the intercession of Christ, and the truths of the gospel,
they only own them to be within; in opposition to the glorious
intercession, and mediation of the man Christ Jesus in his own
person without, now in the presence of his Father, between us and
him, pleading and making intercession for his children. These
things, together with many more, I might mention, but now I
forbear, knowing the none shall be lost, nor altogether carried
away by them, nor any heretics, but the sons of perdition. Now
that they might the better make their doctrine take place in the
hearers, they endeavour to make a fair shew in the flesh, that
thereby they now, as did their fathers in time past, compel and
constrain them who are not by the Lord's right hand planted into
the truth of Jesus, to follow their covered errors, as it is
written (Gal 6:12). "As many as desire to make a fair shew in the
flesh," That is, according to works of the law; do "by good words
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple" (Rom 16:18).
And indeed it doth clearly appear, that those that are carried
away, are such as are not able to discern between fair speeches
declared by heretics, and sound doctrine declared by the simple-hearted
servants of Jesus.

First, Now I shall lay down several grounds, not only why errors
are broached in the world; but also, why so many are carried away
with them.

1. One ground, why so many errors do from time to time come into
the world, is because those that are not indeed of the planting
of the Lord's right hand, might be rooted out (Matt 15:13). Now
these are many times carried away by deceivable doctrines: And
truly in this our God hath both a care of his own glory, and of
his church's welfare. For first, should they not be swept away by
some heresy or other, there might be great dishonour brought to
his name by their continuing among his people: And secondly, that
he might take away such grievances as such may bring, had they
continued still in the society of his children.

2. Another ground why the Lord doth suffer such errors to come into
the world is, because, those that are Christians indeed might be
approved and appear (1Cor 11:19). "For there must be also heresies
among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest."
Should not the Lord go this way to work (sometimes) there would
be many that would make people believe that they are Christians,
and yet are not. And again, that he might make it appear, that
though there be heretics, yet he hath a people, enabled by his
Spirit, to contradict, and oppose them, and plead to the truth of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and his glorious gospel against them.

3. Another ground why the Lord doth suffer, yea, even send delusions
among the people, is, That those who were so idle and slothful,
as not to seek after the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, might be
taken away, and violently possessed with error, and be made to run
greedily after the same; that they might smart the more for their
neglect of the truth. For always, those who were lazy in seeking
after the truth when it was proffered, and afterward hasty after
the doctrine of devils, when that is declared to them, shall be
sure to have their latter behavior to rise up in judgment against
them, in that when the truth was proffered to them they were idle
and did not receive it, and yet when delusion did proffer itself,
they were industrious, and labouring. Now mark, that they all
might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness; because they received not the truth in the love
of it, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall
send them strong delusions, that they might believe a lie, and be
dammed (2Thess 2:10-12).

Second, Now in the second place, why so many are so easily carried
away with errors in this day: the grounds are these That follow.

1. Because men count it enough to be professors of the truth,
without seeking to be possessors of the same. Now because men are
but only professors of the truth, not having it in their hearts in
reality, they are carried away with an error, if it come in never
so little power, more that the truth they profess. And this is
the reason why so many are carried away with the errors that are
broached in these days, because they have not indeed received the
Lord Jesus by the revelation of the Spirit, and with power, but
by the relation of others only; and so having no other witness to
set them down withal, but the history of the word, and the relation
of others concerning the truth contained therein, (though the
knowledge of the truth this way shall abundantly aggravate their
damnation) yet they having not had the Spirit of the Lord to
confirm these things effectually unto them, they are carried away
with delusions.

2. Another reason why so many are carried away with delusions, is,
those differences that are among the children of God about smaller
matter. O Friends! how is the hand of the enemy strengthened by
our carnality, while one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I am
of Apollos; many a poor soul is carried away with delusion. And
why so? They are not satisfied that this is the truth, because the
children are at difference among themselves, about some outward
things. And again, it makes those that are not so desperately
possessed with a spirit of delusion, as are others, but are mere
moral men: I say it makes them to say within themselves, and one
to another; There are so many sects and judgments in the world,
that we cannot tell which way to take. And therefore you that have
the Spirit, pray that these things may cease, least you blush for
your folly, at the appearing of Jesus our Lord.

3. The pride, covetousness, and impiety of hypocrites, and carnal
professors, are great stumbling-blocks to the poor world; and the
cause why many at this day do drink down so greedily a deluding
doctrine, and especially if it come with a garment of pretended
holiness. But as for these, they shall go to their place in their
time, with the curse of the Almighty poured out upon them, for
their casting of stumbling-blocks before the simple by their loose
conversation, if they do not hastily repent of their wickedness,
and close in reality with our blessed Lord Jesus.

4. Another reason why delusions do so easily take place in the
hearts of the ignorant, is, because those that pretend to be their
teachers, do behave themselves so basely among them. And indeed
I may say of these, as our Lord said of the Pharisees in another
case, all the blood of the ignorant, from the beginning of the
world, shall be laid to the charge of this generation. They that
pretend they are sent of the Lord, and come, saying, Thus saith
the Lord; we are the servants of the Lord, our commission is from
the Lord (by succession) and the like; I say, these pretending
themselves to be the preachers of truth, (but are not ) do by
their loose conversation, render the doctrine of God, and his Son
Jesus Christ, (by whom the saints are saved) contemptible, and do
give the adversary mighty encouragement, to cry out against the
truths of our Lord Jesus Christ, because of their wicked walking.
Now shall not his soul be avenged on such a nation as this, who
pretend to be teachers of the people in goodness, when, as for
the most part of them, they are the men, that at this day do so
harden their hearers, such ill examples, that none goeth beyond
them for impiety. As for example; Would a parishioner learn to
be proud? he or she need look no farther than to the priest, his
wife and family; for there is a notable pattern before them. Would
the people learn to be wanton, they may also see a pattern among
their teachers. Would they learn to be drunkards? they may also
have that from some of their minister; for indeed they are ministers
in this, to minister ill example to their congregations. Again,
would the people learn to be covetous, they need but look to
their minister, and they shall have a lively, or rather a deadly
resemblance set before them, in both riding and running after
great benefices, and parsonages by night and by day. Nay, they
among themselves will scramble for the same. I have seen, that
so soon as a man hath but departed from his benefice as he calls
it, either by death or out of covetousness of a bigger, we have
had one priest from this town, and another from that, so run,
for these tithe-cocks and handfuls of barley, as if it were their
proper trade, and calling, to hunt after the same. O wonderful
impiety and ungodliness! are you not ashamed of your doings? If
you say no, it is (perhaps) because you are given over of God to
a reprobate mind (Read Romans 1). towards the end. As it was with
them, so (it is to be feared) it is with many of you, who knowing
the judgments of God, that they who do such things are worthy of
death, not only do the same, but have (as I may so say) pleasure
also in them that do them. And now you that pretend to be the
teachers of the people in verity and truth, though we know that
some of you are not: Is it a small thing with you, to set them
you say are your flock such an example as this. Were ever the
Pharisees so profane; to whom Christ said, ye vipers, how can
ye escape the damnation of hell; doth not the ground groan under
you? surely, it will favour you no more than it favoured your
fore-runners. Certainly the wrath of God lies heavy at your doors,
it is but a very little while, and your recompense shall be upon
your own head. And as for you that are indeed of God among them,
though not of them; separate yourselves. Why should the righteous
partake of the same plagues with the wicked? O ye children of the
harlot! I cannot well tell how to have done with you, your stain
is so odious, and you are so senseless, as appears by your practices.
But I shall at this time forbear, having in some measure discharged
my conscience according to the truth against you; hoping if God
do give me opportunity, and a fair call, that I shall say no more,
only thus much; Be ashamed of your earthly-mindedness, if you can;
and be converted, or else you shall never be healed.

Here might I also aggravate your sin by its several circumstances,
but I shall rather forbear; supposing that you may entertain
wrong and harsh thoughts of me, though I have spoken the truth;
therefore I shall at his time rather keep silence, and wish you
to amend, than to rake in your sores; for thereby would your stink
go more abroad in the world, Therefore I say forbear. And now to
the reader, I beseech thee to have a care of thy soul, and look
well to the welfare of it: And that you may do so, have a care
what doctrine it is the your receivest. Be not contented until
thou in deed and in truth, in the light of the Spirit of Christ,
see thy sins washed away in the blood of that Lamb, who did offer
up himself a ransom on the cross on Mount Calvary, for the sins
of thy soul and body, together with the rest of the saints of God.

And let not the legal holiness of the one, nor the loose profane
conversation of the other, beat thee of from pursuing after the
truths of Jesus, as the truth is in Jesus, (and so laid down in this
my discourse) neither let the plausibleness of the other beguile
thy simple heart. And now to you that are carried away with the
delusions at this day broached in the world, by the instruments
of Satan, and that after a profession of the truth: I say to you,
Turn again, (if you can) peradventure there may be hope, and that
you may escape that wrath which justly you have deserved: But if
you shall still refuse the Lord that speaks now from heaven in
mercy to you, you shall not hereafter escape the Lord, that in his
own time will speak to you in his wrath, and vex you in his sore
displeasure.

And now a few words to you that have indeed closed in with the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of Mary, and they are these that follow.
(1.) Be of good cheer, all "your sins are forgiven you for his
name's sake" (1John 2:12). (3.) Know that though your Lord Jesus,
who is in you by his Spirit, be absent from you touching his
bodily presence, yet he is not forgetful of you, but is preparing
a place for you (John 14:1-3). (4.) Consider, That he is also at
his very present, in his very person in the presence of his Father
now in the heavens, praying and making intercession for you, that
you may be brought safe to glory (Heb 7:24). Father, I will (saith
he) that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I
am; that they may behold my glory (John 17:25). (5.) Know also,
That he hath overcome in his own person (when he was in the
world) devil, death, sin, hell, the curse of the law, the power
of the grave, and all other evils, in the body of his flesh for
you (Heb 2:14). (6.) Believe also, that while you are in the world,
all things shall fall out for your good at the end, whether they
be temptations, doctrines of devils, workings of corruption, all
things shall fall out for your good, who love our precious Lord
Jesus (Rom 8:28). (7.) Be assured, that all your enemies shall
very suddenly be under your feet, even Satan and all (Rom 16:20).
(8.) Consider, That there shall no temptation befall you in the
days of your pilgrimage, but God will enable you to bear it; Ay,
and make a way also for you to escape the destroying danger of it
(1Cor 10:13). (9.) When the time of your dissolution shall come,
your Jesus will deal with you, as he did with blessed Lazarus,
that is, he will send his angels to fetch your souls away to glory
(Luke 16:22). (10.) Believe also, and know assuredly, that at the
last day, he will also raise your bodies out of their graves, and
make them also for ever vessels of his glory (Rom 8:23), compared
with (John 5:28; 1Thess 4:14-18). (11.) And lastly, consider,
That though now by the world, and heretics, you be counted as not
worth the looking after; Yet you have your day a coming, when as
the Dive's of this and all other ages, would be glad if they might
have but the least favour from you, one drop of cold water on the
tip of your fingers. O you despised begging Lazarus's (as in Luke
16:24.) For the world, for all their stoutness, must be forced
to come to judgment, before your Lord and you (1Cor 6:2). "This
honour have all his saints" (Psa 149:9).

Now seeing that these things be so, I beseech you by (those ) the
mercies of God, (1.) That you do give up your bodies, as hands,
tongue, strength, health, wealth, and all that you have and are, to
the service of God, your God (Rom 12:1). (2.) "Let your moderation
[in every thing] be known unto all men. (for) The Lord is at hand"
(Phil 4:5). (3.) Study to walk as like the Lord Jesus Christ, as
ever you can, for your lives (Matt 11:29). (4.) Let that you strive
for, be the faith of the gospel of your precious Lord Jesus (Phil
1:27). (6.) Let your hearts be always in heaven, where our Lord
Jesus is (Col 3:1-3). (7.) Forbear and forgive one another, in love,
and with all your hearts, as God for Christ sake hath forgiven
you (Eph 4:2). (8.) Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven
(Matt 5:16). (9.) You are the salt of the earth, have a care you
lose not your savour (Matt 5:13). (10.) Be forward to distribute
to those that are in want, for this is well-pleasing to your most
glorious loving Father (Heb 13:16). (11.) Learn all one of another
the things that are good, for this is the command of God, and also
commendable in saints (Phil 3:17). (12.) And lastly, O brethren,
consider what the Lord hath done for you; he hath bought you, and
paid for you with his blood, and he doth now also make it his
business to pray for your safe conduct to glory (Heb 7:25). He hath
delivered you from those that would have been your ruin, and hath
promise to you everlasting life, Let the love of Christ constrain
you, let the love of God win upon your souls. What! he that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: How shall
he not with him freely give us all things. Hold out my brethren,
hold out, for you have but a little while to run: Hold fast unto
the death, and Christ will give you a crown of life (Rev 2:10).
Farewell, dear brethren; the mighty God of Jacob preserve and deliver
you from every evil work; and all the days of our pilgrimage let
us pray one for another, that our God will count us worthy of this
rich and glorious calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of
his goodness, and the work of faith with power, to whom be glory
now and ever.

And now reader, before I make an end of this discourse, I think it
meet to let thee understand, that though there hath been a book put
forth by Edward Borrough, in seeming opposition to that of mine,
called, "Some Gospel-Truths opened according to the scripture,"
Yet the substance of my discourse then published by me, standeth
uncontrolled by scripture, as from him or others. I do not say
he doth not wrangle with them, but I say, he doth not by any one
plain scripture contradict them. As for instance:

1. The first great thing that I do hold forth in that discourse,
is this: That that babe that was born of the virgin Mary, and that
at that time did give satisfaction for sin, was the very Christ
of God, and not a type of anything afterward to be revealed for
the obtaining redemption for sinners within them. Which thing my
adversary can find no ground in scripture to build an opposition
upon, see his book, page 12. but is forced to confess it in word,
though he do deny the very same in doctrine, see his book p. 29.
at his 6th query. And p. 26. where in answer to this question of
mine; Why did the Man Christ hang on the cross on Mount Calvary?
All the answer he gives, is this; Because they wickedly judged him
to be a blasphemer; and as in their account (saith he) he died as
and evil doer. And his is all the ground he giveth: See his answer
to my second query in this my book, taken word for word as he laid
them down.

2. The next thing I do prove in that book is, that that light which
every one hath, is not the Spirit of Christ; because the scripture
saith Some have it not (Jude 19). But Edward Borrough saith, It is
given to every one; [p. 18. of his book:] And he saith, They have
it within them too; [p. 26. of his book,] in answer to my first
question, though he hath no scripture to confirm the same, as I
have had to contradict it. See his book.

3. The next thing I prove, is That Jesus Christ did fulfil the law
in his own person without us for justification, and that his blood
then shed, hath washed away the sins of the children of God, as
aforesaid. Which thing he would oppose, but finds no footing for
his discourse. See his book, p. 12. where he saith, The law is not
fulfilled: (read the latter end of that page) [which is] contrary
to scripture (Col 2:14; Rom 10:4). which saith, "For Christ is
the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth."
Another thing I prove in that book is, That Christ is ascended
into that heaven without, above the clouds and stars; and that I
prove by eight several scripture demonstration, of which not one
is confuted by scripture, though secretly in his book smitten
against. Read his whole book.

4. The next thing I prove, is, That the same Jesus that was born
of Mary, laid in the manger, who is the Saviour, is at this day
making intercession in that body he then took of Mary; which thing
also is not confuted by him, by the scripture; though cunningly
smitten against in his discourse, where he saith, It is only
necessary to salvation to preach Christ within, laying aside all
that Christ did when he was in his own person in the world. See
p. 29. of his book, Qu. 6.

5. Another truth I prove, is, That the very same Jesus that was
born of Mary, that very Man (that was also hanged on the cross)
will come the second time, and that shall be to save his children,
and to judge the world at the last day, that great day of judgment.
And though they will not own, that he shall so come as he went
away, which was a very Man without; yet they could not at all by
the scripture contradict it. But the very sum of his discourses
is a wrangling with the thing laid down, as a dog with a bone; but
hath not, nor cannot by scripture overcome the same. This have I
written, that the reader into whose hand this book may come, may
have the more certain information concerning the things before
published by me, and also concerning the opposition made against them
by the adversary. And here, because I am loath to be too tedious,
I do conclude, and desire thy prayers to God for me (if thou be
a Christian) that I may not only be preserved to the end in the
faith of Jesus, cut that God would enable me to be an earnest
contender for the same, even to the last; and rest,

The servant of the Lord JESUS,

John Bunyan.

Reader,

We, whose names are here under-written, having (through grace)
some blessed faith and experience of the truths declared in this
book, and knowing them so to be; having tried them by the scriptures
in the light of the Spirit, thought it our duty to bear witness
thereunto, together with our brother, desiring the blessing of God
may go along with these endeavours of his, for the doing good to
our Christian brethren, of any other who may read it. Farewell.

Yours in the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, for which faith we
desire to contend,

Richard Spencly. John Burton. John Child.

A VINDICATION OF GOSPEL TRUTHS, &c.

It is very expedient that there should be heresies amongst us,
that thereby those which are indeed of the truth might be made
manifest; and also that the doctrine of God, and his Son Jesus
Christ, might the more cast forth its luster and glory. For the
truth is of that nature, that the more it is opposed, the more glory
it appears in; and the more the adversary objects against it, the
more it will clear itself; which doth give me, and all that stand
for it, and doth plead on its side in the wisdom of the Spirit,
much boldness and encouragement, to venture without any slavish
fear upon those that have already, or shall hereafter, stand up
to oppose it. I did some few weeks past, put forth a small book,
called, Some Gospel-Truths opened, and so forth; and the thing I
looked for from them was, namely, opposition from the adversary,
which hath been accomplished in that, namely, as I did look for
it, so did it happen; not that it daunted me, for if it had so
done, it might have made me kept those truths within my breast,
which are now made manifest by me (as well as others) to the world.
Now I have not only met with some opposition from others face to
face in secret, but there is one Edward Burrough (as I heard his
name is so, by some of themselves) that hath ventured to stand
up against the truth, with the rest of his companions, and hath
published a book, called, "The true faith of the gospel of peace
contended for, &c." In which book of his there is a very great
number of heresies cunningly vented by him, and also many things
there falsely reported of me, which things in this my discourse I
shall very plainly discover; and the way that I shall take, shall
be by laying down some of thy expressions, and also some of mine;
and by inquiring into the truth of one, and the error of the other,
through the assistance of the Spirit of Christ, and according
to the scriptures. Only by the way, I think good to mind thee of
thy clothing thyself with the words of the prophets and apostles,
against whom thou dost fight (as will appear in my following
discourse) and also of thy endeavouring to wrest the sword out of
the hands of the saints, and art fighting against them bitterly,
with a parcel of scolding expressions. But I wish thee to learn,
(if thou canst) to be sober, and to keep under thy unruly spirit;
and do not so much appear, at least not so grossly, a railing
Rabshakeh; but contrariwise, if you would be looked upon to be
holy, which ( we know and believe that ) as yet, many of you are
not. Let at the least some appearance of moderation be manifest
among you. After many words that are flung into the wind by thee
my adversary, in the first and second page of thy book, thou couldst
not be contented therewith, as being too few to vent thyself
withal; but thou breakest out in page 3. with a small testimony
of John Burton, and his fellow, saying,

"They have joined themselves with the broken army of Magog--And
have shewed themselves in the defence of the dragon against the
Lamb, in the day of war betwixt them." When alas! poor soul we
do know, and are bold to declare, in the name of the Lord Jesus
the Son of Mary, that our God hath owned us, with others of his
servants, in his own work against the devil's devices and false
doctrine; as instruments both for the comforting and establishing
of his own, and also for the convincing and converting of some of
them, who aforetime was not converted. And friend, why dost thou
say, that we join with Magog in the defence of the dragon against
the Lamb, when thou seest the whole drift both of my brother's
epistle, and also of my writing, is to exalt and advance the
first-born of Mary, the Lord of glory, and to hold on his side,
notwithstanding there are so many tempests go through the world,
And the rather, because we know that it is he, and he alone, that
did bear our sins in his own body on the tree (1Peter 2:24), for
it is he that hath taken away the sins of the world. Now I say
therefore, do not thou thus accuse the brethren, for speaking good
of the name of Jesus, lest thou be troubled at thy end for thus
spending thy beginning in taking part with the devil to accuse
God's children.

Then in the same page thou sayest, thou hast numbered up part of
our work, and the sum is, A corrupted grain of Babylon's treasure,
&c. Ans. Friend, The sum of our discourse is of the birth,
righteousness, death, blood, resurrection, ascension, intercession,
and second coming of the Son of Mary the virgin, by which
righteousness, blood, death, burial, resurrection, ascension, and
intercession we are saved. And dost thou count this a corrupted
grain of Babylon's treasure? Have a care what thou sayest, least
thou utter that with thy mouth now, which will lie heavy on thy
conscience for ever.

Then, as though this thy unwise speaking were too little, thou
breakest out with a taunt, or a jeer, saying; A larger portion, and
more to the purpose might have been brought in, but with such as
you had, or could procure from your neighbours are you come. Ans.
Friend, Who hath despised the day of small things? But again, we
desire not to bring to others, no nor to know ourselves, anything
else but Jesus Christ (the Son of Mary) and him crucified for our
sins (1Cor 2:2). Then thou sayest further in the same page, that
though thou hast not seen our faces, yet our spirit is tried,
and we are clearly described to thee, (sayest thou) to be of the
stock of Ishmael, and of the seed of Cain, whose line reacheth to
the murdering priests, &c. Ans. Friend, thou art very censorious,
and utterest many words without knowledge. We bless God, for the
most part of our line, we do labour to stretch it out, either in
building up and exhorting the saints of the most High, to cleave
close to their Jesus, or else as much as in us lies, we labour
to convince poor souls of their lost condition, according to the
word of God, and not to murder any. Nay contrariwise, we desire
through grace, if at any time we chance to see any of Christ's
lambs in the teeth of any wolf or bear, be they never so terrible
in appearance; I say, we desire, we labour, we strive, and lay
out ourselves, if it be possible, to recover the same, though with
the hazard of our lives, or whatsoever may befall us in doing our
duty. And whereas thou sayest in the 4th page, that we are found
enemies to Christ, revealed in his saints. Ans. Thou dost us wrong,
for we labour all that we may to countenance the same, where he
doth indeed appear: and if at any time we do see or discern, that
any soul hath any breathing after the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, we are so far from disowning or discountenancing of the
same, that we give them all the encouragement we may: Nay, and
we are so far from discountenancing the doctrine of God, and his
Son Jesus Christ, that we say plainly, some have not the Spirit
of Christ in them, and they are reprobates, according to that
scripture (Rom 8:9). "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his." And again, Some are "sensual, having not the
Spirit" (Jude 19). And again, we are so far from being against the
doctrine of the Spirit of Christ in his saints, we bless God that
we say, It is the distinguishing character of a true believer, from
others: All which things do I also affirm in my book, and hold
forth, as doth also my brother in his epistle. Therefore, I marvel,
that you should be overseen, as to utter so many false things
together, in less than four sides of paper, I wonder what will be
the end of your discourse.

Well, now thou dost come and fall a wrangling with some of the
words of my brother Burton, which are to this purpose, (he speaking
before of the doctrine of Jesus) and this is quite contrary
(saith he) to those commonly called Familists, Ranters, Quakers,
and others, who on the other hand either deny Christ to be a real
man without them, blasphemously fancying him to be only God manifest
in their flesh; or else make his human nature with the fulness of
the Godhead in it, to be but a type of God to be manifested in
the saints. Now first of all, the great offence thou takest of
some of these words, is, because he doth join in his discourse,
Familists, Ranters, and Quakers together. Friend, what harm is it
to join a dog and a wolf together? A fawning dog and a wolf in
sheep's clothing; they differ a little in outward appearance, but
they can both agree to worry Christ's lambs. But again, friend,
let us a little compare the principles of a Ranter and a Quaker
together, and it will clearly appear, that in many of their
principles (at least) they agree, or jump in one: As

1. The Ranters will own Christ no otherwise, than only within;
and this is also the principle of the Quakers, they will not own
Christ without them. 2. The Ranters, they cry down all teaching,
but the teaching within: and so do the Quakers (witness thousands)
and yet condemn their principles by their practice, as the Ranters
also did and do. Now the apostle saith the contrary, saying, "He
that knoweth God heareth us; (meaning himself with the rest of the
apostles and servants of Christ.) He that is not of God heareth
not us" (1John 4:6). Again, 3. the Ranters are neither for the
ordinance of baptism with water, nor breaking of bread. And are
not you the same? 4. The Ranters would profess that they were
without sin: and how far short of his opinion are the Quakers? 5.
The Ranters would not own the resurrection of the bodies of the
saints after they were laid in the graves: And how say you, Do you
believe that the very bodies of the saints, as the very body of
Abraham, and the body of Isaac, with the bodies of all the saints,
notwithstanding some of them have been in the graves thousands
of years. others hundreds, some less: I say, Do you believe the
resurrection of these very bodies again, which were buried so
long since; or do you hold, as the Ranters do, nothing but the
resurrection from a sinful to an holy state in this life.

And really I tell thee (reader) plainly, that for the generality,
the very opinions that are held at this day by the Quakers, are
the same that long ago were held by the Ranters. Only the Ranters
had made them threadbare at an alehouse, and the Quakers have set
a new gloss upon them again, by an outward legal holiness, or
righteousness. But again, Why should you be so angry with my
brother, for joining of a sinner and a liar together? Is there any
great harm in that? Surely no. And the joining Ranters and Quakers
together, is but so. The Quakers themselves confess, the Ranters
are to be disowned, page 4. Nay if they would not, yet God
hath disowned them in the open view of the nations. Now that the
Quakers are liars, I shall prove from their own mouth. As first,
from the several things that I did oppose even now, page 1-4, of
this book, called, "the true Faith of the Gospel of Peace," &c.
Now lest they should be slighted and set at nought, I shall shew
you clearly this man's lies manifestly laid down in his book,
page 11, 12. That I said positively, the blood of Christ was shed
before the world began. Whereas I said only this, That in the
account of God (mark it, in the account of God) his blood was shed
before the world was, according to that scripture (Rev 13:8). "The
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world," in my book, page 3
[141]. Secondly, he saith, that I cry aloud against Christ within,
in page 24. Of his book. And again he saith, "That all my work is
an obscure shooting against the manifestation of Christ within."
Where he speaks very falsely of me, for I confess and own God's
Christ within as well as without, as appears in my book, page 206.
towards the end [173]. And in the epistle to my book you may find
the same held out by me for two or three leaves together; besides,
many other places of my book dith testify of the same; therefore,
doth not he lie miserably in this also?

Again, he saith, that I am one of those that do preach for hire,
through covetousness, making merchandise of souls, page 23. of book,
which is also an untruth, as I shall shew further when I come to
the place.

Again he saith, in page 30, that I said "Christ's coming in the
Spirit was no coming." Here also he uttereth falsehood. I never said
so, as many or our brethren can witness. But of his also in its
place, when I come to it, with many other things which he hath very
untruly vented of me, which I fear not but they shall be cleared,
both now, and also at the second appearance of the man Christ
Jesus. And therefore friend (I say to thee) be not so pharisaical
as to say within thine heart, "I am not as this publican." Why am
I reckoned with the Ranters? thou art, both thou and thy fellows,
of the same mind with them in many things, and shall assuredly
partake of the same plague with them, if they and you repent not
speedily.

Again, in page7, thou wouldest make us believe, that the Quakers
do really and truly lay the Christ of God, God-man, for their
foundation. Saying, "We prize the Lord Jesus Christ, God-man, to
be precious to us, and to all that do believe, and have owned him
to be the foundation," &c. Now friend, this is fairly spoken; but
by word in general we may be deceived, because a man may speak
one thing with his mouth, and mean another thing in his heart;
especially it is so with those that use to utter themselves
doubtfully; therefore we will a little enquire what it is to lay
Christ, God-man for a foundation.

1. Then, to lay God's Christ, God-man, for a foundation, is to believe
that man that was born of the Virgin Mary, to be the saviour.

How he was and is the saviour, and therefore if you do indeed lay
him for your foundation, then you do believe that when the man
Christ did hang on the cross on Mount Calvary, that then your
sins were satisfied for at that time, as it is written, "Who his
ownself bare our sins in his own body on the tree" (1Peter 2:24).

2. If the Christ of God, God-man, be indeed your foundation, then
you do believe, that that very man in that very body, did fulfil
all the law, in the point of justification, as it is written,
"Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believeth" (Rom 10:4). So that now, believe aright in what the Son
of Mary hath done without on the cross, and be saved.

3. If you have laid Christ that man aright for your foundation,
then you do believe, that when he was raised out of the sepulchre
into which Joseph had laid him, then at that time was accomplished
your justification (Rom 4:25). How say you to these things, Do
you make an open profession of them without dissembling? Or do you
not (notwithstanding your talk of Christ) in very deed deny the
virtue of the death and blood of Christ without, as for justification
and life? If so, you have not laid him for your foundation.

4.I you have indeed laid Christ, God-man for your foundation, then
you do lay the hope of your felicity and joy on this, That the son
of Mary is now absent from his children in his person and humanity,
making intercession for them and for thee, in the presence of his
Father (2 Cor 5:6). And the reason that thou canst rejoice here
at is, because thou hast not only heard of it with thine ear only,
but dost enjoy the sweet hope and faith of them in thy heart; which
hope and faith is begotten by the Spirit of Christ, which Spirit
dwelleth in thee, (if thou be a believer) and sheweth those things
to thee to be the only things. And God having shewn thee these
things, thus without thee by the Spirit that dwelleth in thee,
thou hast mighty encouragement to hope for the glory that shall
be revealed at the coming again of the man Christ Jesus, of which
glory thou hast also greater ground to hope for a share in, because
that that Spirit that alone is able to discover to thee the truth
of these things, is given to thee of God, as the first fruits of
that glory which is here-after to be revealed, being obtained for
thee by the man Christ Jesus's death on Mount Calvary, and by his
blood that was shed there, together with his resurrection from
the dead, out of the grave where they had laid him. Also, thou
believest that he is gone away from thee in the same body which
was hanged on the cross, to take possession of that glory, which
thou, through his obedience, shall at his (the very same man's)
return from heaven the second time, have bestowed upon thee,
having all this while prepared and preserved it for thee, as he
saith himself: "I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto
myself, that where I am, there ye may be also" (John 14:2,3).
Again.

5.If thou hast laid Christ, God-man, for thy foundation, though
thou hast the Spirit of this man Christ within thee, yet thou dost
not look that justification should be wrought out for thee, by that
Spirit of Christ that dwelleth within thee, for thou knowest that
salvation is already obtained for thee by the man Christ Jesus
without thee, and is witnessed to thee by his Spirit which dwelleth
within thee. And thus much doth this man Christ Jesus testify unto
us where he saith he shall glorify me; mark, "He shall glorify;"
(saith the Son of Mary)but how? Why, "he shall receive of mine
(what I have done, and am doing in the presence of the Father)
and shall shew it unto you" (John 16:14). I have been a little
the larger in this, because it is of weight.

But again, thou sayest further, The rest of this first epistle I
shall say little to; only thus much is the mind of the penman's
spirit, secretly smiting at the doctrine of true faith and salvation,
(to wit) Christ within. Ans. My friend, by saying that my brother
doth strike at the doctrine of true faith and salvation, thou dost
him a great deal of wrong; for it is so far from him so to do, that
he telleth souls plainly, that without true faith in the blood of
the Son of Mary, who was crucified on Mount Calvary, there is no
remission; for saith he, it is only through that one offering then
given up to the Father, that you must be justified. And that is
according to the whole stream of scripture: For by one offering,
What was that? Why, the offering up of the body of Jesus once for
all (Heb 10:10), he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.
"But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever
sat down." Mark it: "this man after he had offered one sacrifice
for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God" (verse 19).

And as for thy saying, that salvation is Christ within; if thou mean
in opposition to Christ without; instead of pleading for Christ,
thou wilt plead against him; for Christ, God-man, without on the
cross, did bring in salvation for sinners. And the right believing
of the, doth justify the soul. Therefore Christ within, of the
Spirit of him who did give himself a ransom, doth not work out
justification for the soul in the soul; but doth lead the soul
out if itself, and out of that that can be done within itself, to
look for salvation in that man that is now absent from his saints
on earth (2Cor 5:6). Why so? For [because] it knoweth that there
is salvation in none other (Acts 4:12). And therefore I would wish
thee to have a care what thou dost, for I tell thee, that man who
is now jeered by some, because he is preached to be without them,
will very suddenly come the second time, to the great overthrow
of those, who have spoken, and shall still speak against him (Jude
14,15).

Thou sayest also the next thing thou mindest, is this in the second
epistle,1 where a questions asked, Who are the men that at this
day are so deluded by the Quakers, and other pernicious doctrines,
but they that counted it enough to be talkers of the gospel, &c.
And why? because he saith the Quakers are those deceivers that
at this day beguile poor souls by their doctrine. Alas poor man,
why shouldest thou be angry for my speaking the truth, in saying:
The Quakers are deceivers, this will easily appear.

1. They deny the man Christ to be without them, and own Christ no
otherwise, but as he is within, contrary to that scripture, which
saith, for "while we are at home in the body we are absent from
the Lord." This is touching his bodily presence. And again, he was
parted from them, "and a cloud received him out of their sight."
And he was carried away from them, and so received up into heave
(Acts 1:9-11). Now he that denieth this, is a deceiver, as is
clear, in that he doth speak against the truth laid down in the
scripture.

2. The Quakers are deceivers, in that they persuade souls that
Christ is crucified in them, dead within them, and kept down with
some thing within them, which was never taught by those that
spoke the scripture from the Spirit of God. Shew me a scripture
to confirm such a doctrine as this, which hath been avouched over
and over by the Quakers.

3. The Quakers are deceivers, because they do persuade souls, that
that man that was born of the Virgin Mary, is not above the clouds
and the stare, when the scripture saith, "a cloud received him
out of the sight of his saints." And again, that he is above the
highest heavens, which must needs be above the stars, for they
are not the highest.

4. The Quakers are deceivers, because they persuade souls not to
believe, that that man that was crucified, and rose again flesh
and bones (Luke 24:38-40). shall so come again, that very man, in
the clouds of heaven to judgment as he went away; and at the very
same time shall raise up all the men and women out of their graves,
and cause them to come to the valley of Jehoshaphat; because there
will he, that very man, sit to judge all the heathen round about.
I say, they strive t beat souls off from believing this, though
it be the truth of God witnessed by the scripture (Joel 3:11,12;
Acts 1:10,11). "This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come (mark, the very same) in like manner as ye
have seen him go into heaven." "And his feet shall stand in that
day (the day of his second coming) upon the Mount of Olives" (Zech
14:4). Where is that? Not within thee, but that which is without
Jerusalem, before, it on the east side. I say now, he that persuades
souls not to believe this, but makes them believe there is no such
thing, as the Quakers do, he is a deceiver. Again, the Quakers
make no difference between that light wherewith Christ, as he is
God, hath enlightened all; and the Spirit of Christ he gives not
to all; and the Spirit of Christ he gives not to all, which I
shall show by and by to be a deceit.

5. The Quakers are deceivers, because they say, That every one
hath that which is like the Spirit of Christ, even as good as the
Spirit of Christ, page 10 of his book, which is desperate blasphemy.
The scripture saith plainly, "That some are sensual, having not
the Spirit." And yet though they have not that, they have, says
the Quakers, that which is as good as that. O wonderful deceit,
as I shall farther show by and by when I come to the place. But
to cover himself, and so his deceit, he doth apply that to himself
that should be applied for the encouragement of the children of
God: saying, the children of God was always counted deceivers, we
(saith he) have a cloud of witnesses. Answer, friend, they were
called deceivers, and were not so; but you are rightly called so,
as I have already showed, and shall show farther by and by. In
the meantime, know, that the devil knows how to take children's
bread, and cost it to the dogs.

Then the next thing that he is grieved with, is, because I said,
there are none but a company of light notionists, ranters, with
here and there a legalist, that was shaking in their principles,
that were carried away by the Quakers, &c. When this appears in
all men's sight that can see, though you would not have it so (it
is like.) And as for your saying, because all sorts of people are
brought to God, I am offended therewith; I answer, No friend, I
bless God my soul can rejoice that souls come in to Jesus Christ,
though it grieves me to see, how some with a spirit of delusion
are deceived, and destroyed, by its coming unto them as an angel
of light. And whereas thou sayest I am like the Pharisees, who
said, none believe, but a company of poor people, which know not
the law. Answ. I bless God, I do know they are I bless God, I do
know they are the poor that receive the gospel; but friend, I must
tell you, that you and your fellows may seek for justification
from the law, and yet have no better a recompense, than to be
condemned by the law.

Now passing many railings, I come to the next thing that thou dost
stumble at, which is in that I say, some of those delusions the
devil doth deceive poor souls withal, is first, in that he doth
persuade them, that salvation was not completely wrought out for
sinners by the man Christ Jesus, though he did it gloriously upon
the cross without the gates of Jerusalem. Now these words, "he
did it gloriously on the cross, without the gates of Jerusalem,"
thou leavest out. Therefore I ask, do you believe that at that
time, when he did hang upon that cross on Mount Calvary, that he
did by that death he died there, redeem all his elect from eternal
vengeance? If not, whatever thou sayest, thou wilt certainly see,
that Satan hath caught thee in his snare, notwithstanding thy
railing against the Lord Jesus. And friend, thou mayest call thy
conscience the man Christ Jesus, or the light (as thou callest it)
in thy conscience the man Christ Jesus; which if thou do, this is
a delusion, and a dangerous doctrine. For a Spirit hath not flesh
and bones, and so hath the man Christ Jesus. Now it may be, you
think farther that the church, with the Spirit of Christ, is the
man Christ Jesus, which is also a damnable heresy. Therefor, speak
plainly; Dost thou believe that that man Christ Jesus is ascended
from his people in his person? And again, dost thou believe that
he which ascended from his disciples, did bring in everlasting
salvation for them, in that his body which ascended from them? An
answer to this might give great satisfaction to souls, if also it
might be made in words easily to be understood. Again,

Thou art also offended with the second deceit which I lay down
in my epistle, which is (say I) for the devil to bid souls follow
that light which they brought into the world with them, telling
them, that that will lead them to the kingdom. Now thou seemest
gravelled, because I said, which they brought into the world with
them. If thou art offended at that, show me when, and at what time
every soul receives a light from Christ after it comes into the
world. Now this I say, That every man hath not the Spirit of Christ
within him (Jude 19). And that there is nothing that can show
the soul the things of Christ savingly, but the Spirit of Christ
(1Cor 2:11). Then will not you yourself confess, that he is deluded,
that is persuaded to follow that light that cannot reveal Christ
unto him? But I must mind you of one filthy error also which thou
layest down in page 10. Corrupting the scripture to make it good,
but in vain; where thou sayest, That light which every man is lightened
withal, will lead unto the kingdom of peace and righteousness. And
then thou addest, for saith Christ, "I am the light of the world,
he that followeth me shall not [abide in darkness, or] walk in
darkness." Pray mark, First, thou callest it the light of Christ,
where with he hath lightened every one; and here thou comest a
step higher, and callest it, Christ himself; and then corruptest
that scripture, where the Son of Mary saith, "I am the light of
the world," &c. Here thou wouldest very willingly have room to
broach they folly, but it may not be; for though Christ be the
light of the world, yet he is not in every one in the world. But
secondly, I pray where was Christ when he spake those words? was
he I say, within his disciples, or without them, when he said,
"I am the light of the world?" He was without them, and walked up
and down in the world with them from place to place, a very man.
Therefore he did not mean at that time any light within, but
himself who was without. And indeed, they who will follow Christ
aright, must follow him without, to the cross without, for
justification on Mount Calvary without, (that is, they must seek
for justification by his obedience without.) To the grave without,
and to his ascension and intercession in heaven without; and this
must be done through the operation of his own Holy Spirit, that
he hath promised shall show these things unto them, being given
within them for that purpose (John 16:14). Now the Spirit of
Christ that leads also, but whither? I leads to Christ without,
which said, being without, "I am the light of the world: he that
followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light
of life" (John 8:12). Deny this, that Christ was without when he
spake those words (I am the light of the world) if you can.

But to come more close, to the thing. That light wherewith Christ,
as he is God, hath lightened every one that cometh into the world,
is the soul of man, which is the life of the body, and yet itself
is but a creature, and made by the creator of all things (Isa 57:16).
and is not the Spirit, as some do think it is. This creature hath
one faculty of its own nature, called conscience, which hath its
place in the soul, where it is as a judge to discern of things
good or bad, and judge them accordingly, as the apostle saith,
speaking of the heathens, "Their conscience also bearing witness
and their thoughts the meanwhile accusing or else excusing one
another" (Rom 2:14). This conscience is that in which is the law
of nature (1Cor 11:14). which is able to teach the Gentiles, that
sin against the law, is sin against God: And yet it is called
but even nature itself, as he saith there, "Doth not even nature
itself teach you?" &c.

Now this conscience, this nature itself, because it can control,
and chide them for sin, who give ear unto it, therefore must it be
idolized, and made a God of. O wonderful! that men should make a
God and a Christ of their consciences, because they can convince
of sin. But thou goest ramping on, and sayest, there is nothing
but the light of Christ that will convince of sin, and thou biddest
me, mind that. Now dost thou mean the Spirit of Christ? dost
thou say that that which thou callest the light of Christ, is the
Spirit of Christ? If so, then there is conscience which is not the
Spirit of Christ, but a poor dunghill creature, in comparison of
the Spirit of Christ; yet will convince of sin, as is clear, from
that 8th of John. Where the woman is mentioned, who was taken in
adultery by the Pharisees, or others, who when they heard brought
her to Chris, and began to accuse her, Christ said, "He that
is without sin among you let him first cast a stone at her." And
what then? When they heard that, they were convicted by their
own consciences. Mark, he doth not say, by the light of Christ
in their consciences, as some would have it be; No, but by their
own consciences they were convinced, and went out one by one. And
were they all served so? Yea, from the eldest, even to the last;
for they all had consciences, though not the Spirit of Christ. So
that friend, here is something beside the Spirit of Christ, that
can and doth convince of sin, even a man's own conscience, the law
of nature; nay nature itself, which no man will say is as good as
the Spirit of Christ, except they are guided by a deluding Spirit.
Again, thou sayest, He that convinceth of sins against the law,
leads up to the fulfilling of the law. Friend, thy conscience
convinceth of sins against the law, follow thy conscience, it may
lead thee under the curse of the law, through its weakness; but
it can never deliver thee from the curse of the law by its power.
For if righteousness come by the obedience to the law, or by thy
conscience either, then Christ is dead in vain (Gal 2:21).

Again thou sayest, "That I and my generation would leap over the
law."

Answ. For justification we look beyond it to the Son of Mary; yet
we know that the law is good, if it be used lawfully; but if it be
used unlawfully, as those do use it, who seek to be justified by
their obedience to it, it is made and idol of, and a saviour,
though it were given to no such purpose: For if there had been a
law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should
have come by (thy obedience to) the law (Gal 3:21). Now at thy
conclusions, sometimes thou dost utter thyself in this wise, Learn
what this means.

Answ. Indeed thy words are dark, and enough to deceive the hearts
of the simple; but blessed be God, he hath given me to understand,
that thou dost all along in the drift of thy discourse, disown
Christ without, by pretending to a Christ within; whereas hadst
thou indeed the Spirit of Christ within thee, it would be thy great
business to extol and magnify the Son of Mary, the Christ of God
without thee, because it is the nature of the same Spirit so to do,
even to glorify Christ without, who went away from his disciples
into heaven, to prepare a place for them (Luke 24:50,51).

Then thou further sayest (with a kind of disdaining spirit) "Many
things more thou passest by in my book, as being not pertinent
to the thing in hand." But I believe they are so pertinent, that
neither thou, nor thy friends or fellows are able to contradict
without blaspheming, in the view of all them that have eyes to see:
for if they could, it should have been done by thee. And whereas
thou sayest, "Fools must be meddling." Answer, It must needs be,
that the saints of God should be called fools by the enemies of
the man Christ Jesus without, because that the doctrine of the man
Christ Jesus, crucified without for the sins of poor sinners, is
also held to be foolishness by them; although it be the wisdom;
and also the power of God, unto every one that believeth (1Cor
1:23,24).

And further, thou sayest, that the Pope can speak as much of
Christ without, as I. Answer, friend, dost thou put no difference
betwixt the speaking of Christ without, and believing in Christ
without? I tell thee, though there may be many that can speak of
the Christ of God without, yet there are but very few that can, or
do believe indeed in him without, by the mighty operation of his
Holy Spirit within. Nay, you yourselves do testify this, who deny
that the salvation of sinners was completely wrought out by that one
offering of Jesus Christ without upon the cross on Mount Calvary,
and that he is ascentded from his disciples above the clouds,
touching his bodily presence. (as in 2Cor 5:6 compared with Acts
1:9-11).

Then again thou sayest, "I do ask myself a question, and do also
answer it myself deceitfully." The question is, Do not the scriptures
make mention of a Christ within? And thou sayest, I answer it
deceitfully myself. But I answer again, that I am not ashamed of
the answer I then gave, because I know it is truth; and whereas
thou sayest it is deceitful, and yet canst not find fault with any
point thereof, it confirms me, that had there been falsity in it,
such an enemy to the truth, as thou art, would have taken that
advantage, as to have discovered, that thereby thou mightest have
rendered the truth the more odious. The answer I shall leave to
the Christian reader, which is so indeed; yet am confirmed myself
concerning it, and shall give thee an answer to thy question,
which is, Doth not the scriptures say, or witness, that all that
have not Christ within are reprobates? Answer: Yes, the scripture
saith so, and it is true, they that have not the Spirit of Christ
in them, are reprobates. But there are some that are reprobates,
that you will confess. Then by your own argument you must grant,
that some have not the Spirit of Christ in them. Pray take notice,
they that have not the Spirit of Christ in them are reprobates.
There are some who are reprobates; therefore there are some who
are sensual, "having not the Spirit of Christ in them" (see thy
folly how it is made manifest.) (Jude 5:19). The next thing thou
art offended withal, is, because I say, the devil deceives poor
souls by persuading them to follow the light within which all men
have. answer, friend, I say, again, and again, That there is nothing
less than the Spirit of Christ, that can give a soul a sight of
justification by the blood of the man Christ Jesus without, by
following of it. Now as thou sayest thyself, some are reprobates,
and have not the Spirit of Christ.

Then is it any heresy to say, that it is of the devil to persuade
a soul to follow that light which is no better than conscience,
or nature itself (Rom 2:14), which are not able to lead to Christ
his things, being foolishness to it; or is conscience, which every
one is lightened withal, the Spirit of Christ? give an answer in
sincerity.

Then thou sayest, that my whole purpose is a secret smiting at
the light wherewith Christ hath lightened every man. I answer, my
whole design in my book, is, and was, these following things:-

1. To show souls, where salvation is to be had. Namely, in Christ
without,

2. To show souls how they should lay hold of this salvation;
namely, by the operation of the Spirit of Christ, which must be
given within.

3.To forewarn poor souls, that they should not deceive themselves,
neither by conscience, nor the law; which are both inferior, and
much below the Spirit of Christ; even as much as he that buildeth
the house, hath more honour than the house (Heb 3:3).

4. To show how poor souls should know, whether they had the Spirit
of Christ, or not, within them, or whether the Spirit of the devil
had exalted himself above the Spirit of Christ, by transforming
himself into an angel of light.

Farther, thou thinkest I contradict myself, because I admonish
poor souls to beg of God to convince them by his Holy Spirit; and
thou sayest, This is my confusion. When alas, confusion is of,
and from thyself, who wouldst make a defiled conscience, the law
and the Spirit of Christ to be all one; as I shall further clear
to the reader by and by.

But tell thee friend, there are many who have not the Spirit
of Christ, and yet are convinced of sin by their own consciences
(John 8:9). He doth not say, "by the light of Christ in their
consciences," Mark that: Now I knowing, that a man may be convinced,
and yet not by the Spirit of Christ (for he may be without that)
but by nature itself (1Cor 11:14). I do admonish every soul if
they love themselves, to beg of God for Jesus Christ his sake,
that he would not only let them be convince by these poor, low,
empty, beggarly things (their consciences) in respect of the
Spirit of Christ, but that he would convince them by that Spirit
of his effectually, which is not only able to show their lost
state because of sins against the law, but also, to lead them to
the right Saviour, and plant them into him, which all other things
are not able to do. And thus much in answer to thy scolding against
my epistle the truth of which I bless God through the strength of
Christ, I could be willing to seal with my blood.

And now friend, in love to thy soul, I say, have a care of thyself,
that thou do not satisfy thyself with anything, until thou seest by
the operation of the Spirit of Christ (which thou must have given
thee from heaven, as being without it before conversion) that the
blood of that man Christ Jesus that was crucified on Mount Calvary,
did at that same time, when it was there shed, wash thee from all
thy sins, and be not so stout, and so stern against the truth,
because it suits not with thy beguiled conscience. (bear with me
in patience) and seriously inquire into the truth of things according
to the scriptures. "For they are they that testify of Christ, and
how salvation doth come by him."

In thy entering upon my book, the first thing I find thee wrangling
with, is by corrupting my words, and then by calling me liar.

Thou corruptest my words saying, that I said, "the blood of Christ
was shed before the world began." Whereas I said, that in the
account of God, (mark, in the account of God) the blood of Christ
was shed before the world began. Friend, art thou not able to
distinguish, betwixt a thing being done in God's account, or
according to his foreknowledge, and a thing at that is really and
actually done. Surely it was either thy folly to speak evil of the
thing thou knowest not, or else thy madness doth much appear, in
that though thou understandest these things, yet for to wrangle
by corrupting my sayings here, as also in other places, as will
afterwards appear. this is in page 11, of thine, page 3, of my
book.

Then thou goest on, page 12, and quotest the place where I say,
page 37. How horribly are those deceived who look on Jesus (but
thou leavest out those words, the Son of Mary) to be but a type;
which thing you say, you know none that do. And again thou sayest,
that I say, he is of something afterwards to be revealed. My
words thou corruptest; thou wouldst fain gather thus much out of
my words, by corrupting them. that though I denied Christ Jesus
the Son of Mary to be a type, yet I myself say, He was a type, yet
I myself say, He was a type of something afterward to be revealed.
Which thing, as there in my book, so here again I do most positively
deny, and I quote the same words again, for a second confirmation
of the same, saying as then I died; "How horribly are those
deceived, who look on Jesus the Son of Mary to be but a shadow,
or type of something that was afterwards to be revealed." Whereas
the scriptures most lively hold him forth to be the Christ of
God; and not a type or shadow of a Spirit, or body afterwards to
be revealed, but himself was the very substance of all things that
did any way hold forth, or type out, Christ to come: And when he
was indeed come, then was an end put to the law for righteousness
or justification to every one that believeth (Rom 10:4). And
therefore, friend, though thou hast, or wouldest corrupt my words,
yet have a care of corrupting Christ's words, lest thou dost even
heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God. And whereas thou sayest, "Thou deniest
not but Jesus is the substance." Answer, I doubt thou dost not
speak thine heart plainly, but hidest thyself with so saying, as
with an apron; if we inquire into what it is to hold froth Jesus
the Son of Mary to be the substance. Therefor he that holds forth
Jesus the Son of Mary to be indeed the substance, and not a type;
holds forth and believes, that that Jesus that was born of the Virgin
Mary, did in his own body of flesh fulfil the law, and impute the
righteousness of his obedience unto them that he accomplished then
without them; and that his blood that was shed without on the
cross, doth, and hath washed away all sin past, present, and to
come, from him that believeth his; as it is written, "For what
the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, (that
is, through our flesh.) God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh:" That is,
he was condemned in the flesh that he took on him of the Virgin
Mary (Rom 8:3). And again, he bore our sins in his own body on the
tree, which was the cross on Mount Calvary.

Jesus also (saith the apostle) that he might sanctify the people
with his own blood, suffered: Where? Not in any believer, but
without the gate of Jerusalem (Heb 13:12). How say you, do you
really believe that at that time when Jesus did hang on the cross
without Jerusalem's gate, even at that time he did give the justice
of God a full and complete satisfaction for all the sins of all
believers, that have been formerly, or are now, or hereafter shall
be? Or do you look upon Jesus at that time to be but a shadow, or
type of some what that was afterwards to be done within? Answer
plainly, yea, or no; that the simple may understand you.

I now I come to answer thy query laid down, page 12, in these
words; "Did Christ Jesus put an end to the law, for them who live
yet in the transgression of the law condemned?" Indeed a right
answer to this will be great satisfaction to some, though I think
some trouble to others. And therefore in answer to thy question
I shall lay down these following things:

Answ. 1. Christ Jesus did put an end to the law for righteousness,
for all that shall be saved; for he shall not be offered a second
time: No, "but once for all" (Heb 10:10). Once in the end of the
world hath he appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself;
and he hath done it once by himself for all (Heb 9:26). Otherwise
he must have often suffered since the world began: But that must
not be; for he "dieth no more" (Rom 6:9). But say you, "Did he
put and end to the law for them who still live in transgression?"

Answ. 2. There are many poor souls that are given unto Christ,
who yet live in their sins. But Christ did at that time, when he
hanged on the cross, give a full and complete satisfaction for
them. "In due time Christ died for the ungodly: For scarcely for a
righteous man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man some
would even dare to die." Ay, "But God commendeth his love towards
us, in the, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." while
we were yet sinners, yet ungodly (Rom 5:6-8). Nay, he did not only
die for those who still live in sin, but he also makes intercession
now at the throne of his Father's grace for them. "And he
made intercession for the transgressors" (Isa 53:12). "Thou hast
ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive;--and received
gifts for men." For what men? Even "for the rebellious also." To
what end? "That the Lord God might dwell among them" (Psa 68:38).

Answ. 3. That at that very time when Jesus Christ did hang on the
cross on Mount Calvary, was buried, rose again from the dead, and
ascended above the clouds from his disciples, at that very time
was all the law fulfilled for righteousness. He is the end of
the law, mark; he is the end of the law for righteousness. But if
there were anything yet to be done for justification, which was
not then done; there could not be an end put to the law for
righteousness, for every one that believeth. But in that there is
an end put to the law for righteousness by Jesus for all the elect
of God, Christ having once fulfilled it for them: It is manifest,
that there was not anything then left undone by Christ at that
time, which was afterward to be done by his own Spirit in his
children for justification, only believe what the man Christ,
at that time did do, and saved (Acts 13:29-39); and whereas thou
asketh, whether Christ did justify that which the law condemneth?

Answ. 4. I answer, Fourthly, That though Christ Jesus did not
justify sins of ungodliness, yet he justifieth the ungodly. "Now to
him that worketh is the reward [given, or] not reckoned of grace,
but of debt. But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that
justifieth the ungodly, (mark the ungodly) his faith is counted
for righteousness" (Rom 4:4). He is he that justifieth, having
finished the righteousness of the law in his own person for them.
"Mine own arm brought salvation," saith he, but how? Even by his
bleeding on the cross; "we have redemption through his blood" (Eph
1:7), which was shed without the gate (Heb 13:12). Ay, and though
the law condemneth a sinner, yet let but that sinner believe in
Christ, in what he hath done in his own person, and he shall be
"justified from all things, from which he could not be justified
by the law of Moses" (Acts 13:39).

And whereas thou asketh me the meaning of that scripture, "not
one tittle of the law shall fail till all be fulfilled." I answer,
That the law hath already been fulfilled for justification, for
every one that believeth: And a believer is to do nothing for
justification, only believe and be saved; though that law be a rule
for every one that believeth to walk by, but not for justification.
But if you do not put a difference between justification wrought by
the man Christ without, and sanctification wrought by the Spirit
of Christ, within; teaching believers their duty to their God,
for his love in giving Christ; you are not able to divide the word
aright: but contrariwise, you corrupt the word of God, and cast
stumbling-blocks before the people; and will certainly one day most
deeply smart for your folly, except you repent. Here is a plain
answer that may satisfy the simple. The Lord God grant that they
may lay it to heart effectually.

Now this I say further, that if God enable any to receive this
doctrine aright ( namely what I said even now) it will more engage
the soul to God, than all the threatenings, thunder-claps, and
curses that come from the law itself. And a soul will do more for
God, seeing itself redeemed by the blood of the Lamb the Son of
Mary (John 1:29). than if he had all the conditions of the law
to fulfil, and might be sure to have heaven for the fulfilling of
them. Now as to the assurance thou speakest of at the end of thy
question. I know in the first place, that though believers themselves
do sin, yet they have "an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous;" (1John 2:1). And though the doctrine of the gospel
be to abstain from all appearance of evil, yet our Lord Jesus
Christ is so pitiful, as not altogether to deprive his children
of an assurance of their salvation,2 though sometimes through
weakness they do transgress. And whereas you would lay an assurance
on our obedience to the law; I say, our assurance comes through our
believing, and our obedience to the law is a fruit of our believing;
for every one that hath this hope, that he is one of the children,
or sons of God, by faith in Jesus (1John 3:3), "purifieth himself,
even as he is pure." Holiness of life, if it be right, flows from
an assurance of our being justified by Christ's death on the cross,
on Mount Calvary; as it is written again, that he might sanctify
his people with his own blood, he suffered without the gate.

But again, page 12. thou seemest offended, because I say, "They
are deceived, who think to obtain salvation by following the law,
which they call Christ, though falsely." Why shouldst thou be
offended at this, when the scripture saith plainly, "That by the
deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight:
for by the law is the knowledge of sin" (Rom 3:20). But this is
thy frothy argument, "The law convinceth, and is our schoolmaster
to bring us to Christ; therefore the law is not taken away,"
sayest thou. Friend, what is this to the purpose? must we seek for
justification by the works of the law, because the law convinceth?
you may as well say, we must seek for justification from our
consciences, because they do convince: Now where the scripture
saith, the law was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; do
you think it means, we must be first fitted by purification of
ourselves by, or according to the law, before we can be saved by
Christ from the curse of the law? If you say, yea; then doth not
this follow, that Christ Jesus did not come to save sinners, but
to save the righteous; and if so, then you must say, that Christ,
Peter, Paul, and all the servants of the Lord are liars, who have
testified that Christ died not for the godly, but for the ungodly
and sinners.

But where the scripture saith, the law was our schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ: I ask again, is it the ceremonial law, or the
moral law that is meant in this place? If you say the moral, or
the ten commandments, I answer; That doth not lead to life and so
not to Christ; but is properly the ministration of condemnation
(2Cor 3:6-11). That is, the proper work of the moral law, or ten
commandments, is to condemn, if it be not obeyed; and yet not to
bless, until it be every jot fulfilled, which is impossible to be
done by any man for justification, in that exact and severe way
which the law calls for; which makes the Apostle say, as many as
are of the works of the law, are under the curse. Mark, he doth
not say, as many as are of the works of sin, are under the curse,
though that be true; but as many as are of the works of the law,
are under the curse: "for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the
law to do them. But that no man is justified by the law in the
sight of God, it is evident: for, The just shall live by faith"
(Gal 3:10,11).

If it be meant of the ceremonial law, as I am most inclinable to
believe, because he saith it was our schoolmaster; he doth not say
it is, but it was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, being
tutor or governor; holding and significations forth, Christ to
come by its types until the time appointed of the Father, which
appointed time (and so that law) was to have an end, when God sent
forth his Son made of a woman, Jesus the Son of Mary, who was made
under the law, to redeem those that were under the law.

Now the ceremonial law did bring or lead to Christ these two ways:
First, In that it did continue in full force until he did come into
the world, and had done that which was by it held out for him to
do.

Secondly, In that the several types and shadows, as the blood of
bulls and lambs, with diverse other services did lead to, or hold
forth Christ that was to come: But the moral law, or ten commandments,
is so far from leading us to Christ by our following it, that
it doth even lead those that are led by it under the curse. Not
because the law hath an evil end in it, but because of our weakness
and inability to do it; therefore it is forced, as it is just,
to pass a sentence of condemnation on every one, that in every
particular fulfils it not.

In the next place, thou art offended because I said, "It is not,
for I do not know your fellows for boasting under heaven, in that
you, (Pharisees like) do cry up yourselves to be the men, and
condemns all others; when you are THE MEN that are the greatest
enemies to the Christ of God without (who is the Saviour) of any
men under heaven. And in that you pretend you are perfect, when
you are the notablest liars and corrupters of the sayings of the
people of God, yea, and of the scriptures also, that ever I came
near in all the days of my life; and I doubt not but before I
have done with you, I shall make it appear to them that read or
hear my lines aright." the query in page 13. runs thus, "Will that
faith which is without works justify?" I answer, No, neither will
those works which are without faith sanctify. What then, Is it
faith and works together that doth justify? No, it is only faith
in the blood of the man Christ, that did hang on the cross on Mount
Calvary, that doth justify in the sight of God and the soul, and
it is the fruits of faith, good works, which do justify in the
sight of men. So that when it is said, we are justified by works;
it is not meant that works will justify in the sight of God. No,
but shew me (or shew men) thy faith, of justify thy faith to be
true and right before men by thy works. Shew men thy faith by
thy works, it is in the sight of men. So that we conclude a man
is justified, or made manifest to be indeed that which is right,
both to believers, and to the world by its works. Though I must
confess, that both Paul and Peter, and the rest of the saints,
may sometimes be deceived in the truth of the faith of others by
their works.

Again I page 17 thou seemest to be offended, because, I say "loving
by faith, is to apply the Lord Jesus Christ, his benefits, as
birth, righteousness, death, blood, resurrection, ascension, and
intercession, together with the glorious benefits of his second
coming to me, as mine, and for me, &c" (Gal 2:20).

Friend, methinks thou shouldest find no fault with this, but that
the Man Christ Jesus, the Son of Mary, is not very pleasant to
thee, because thou hast swallowed down secretly another doctrine;
but friend, I speak of applying these things. and thou speakest
of talking of them, I know that there are many who talk of Christ,
that will fall short of heaven and glory.

But tell me, what sayest thou to him that doth apply all these
things to his soul, is there not enough in them to justify him, that
doth really and truly in the power of the Spirit, believe this to
be true which I have said? or dost thou deny it and preach another
gospel saith not, who shall ascend, to fetch Christ from above
for salvation. Though there is never a scripture that saith these
words, word for word; yet the scripture saith, "the word is nigh
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; but mark, it is the word
of faith, not the Man Christ Jesus, but faith which layeth hold
on him" (Rom 10:8-9), which is this, "That if thou shalt confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, (who was born of the Virgin, Matt
1:21) and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved." These great and precious
scriptures, with which by corrupting of them, the Quakers have
beguiled many, have this meaning, that if thou shalt confess with
thy mouth the Lord Jesus; that is, in profession and practice, own
him, and believe him to be the anointed Saviour. And shalt believe
in thine heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved; "for with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation." But what should
men believe with the heart? Namely this, that God raised him (
that is Christ) from the dead (verse 10). And therefore, I wonder
thou shouldest so scold, as thou dost, against the truth: If this
be not truth, blame the scriptures which do testify of these things
for truth. For I am ruled and would be ruled by them through the
Spirit.

But farther, thou art offended that I should say, "They are deceived
who own Christ no otherwise than as he was before the world
began." This question, I briefly ask thee, "Had Christ a body of
flesh before the world began?" If you say no, as you must, if you
say true; then do not I say true, when I say, they are deceived
who own Christ no otherwise than as he was before the world began?
because they own him not with that body of flesh which he took of
the Virgin Mary; and so are antichrists, as the scripture saith.
And how say you? Do you believe that the same Christ who was
before the world, without a body, did in time come into the world
and take a body from the Virgin, and in that body did obtain
everlasting redemption for sinners?: and is gone with that very
body into the presence of this Father above the clouds into heaven,
from his saints on earth, though in them by his Spirit. A plain
answer to this would unlock your double meanings. Again, thou
sayest the saints drank of the spiritual rock that followed them.

Friend, I confess, that that spiritual rock that did follow the
fathers, and long after, was from the same loins with them, even
from the loins of Abraham, and the rest of the children of the
promise, according to the promise, was the meat and drink of saints
(Rom 9:4,5). But to look upon Christ no otherwise than as he was
before the world was, which was a Spirit only, and not to own him
now clothed with a body, absent from his children touching the
same body, I dare be bold to say, they are no Christians, but
antichristians, yea antichrists. He that confesseth not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh is antichrist, and of antichrist.
Again,

At this also thou wranglest, because I said that "every spirit that
confesseth not that Jesus Christ, who was with the Father before
the world was, did in the appointed time of the Father, come into
the world, take a body upon him, and was very Man as well as very
God: and did in the very body suffer what did belong to the sons
of men, &c." So my book, page 42, 43, 44. I answer, if thou didst
indeed believe the truth, thou wouldest own these things. But being
deceived, rather that thou wilt let his pass for truth, though
thou wilt put on a vail, and venture upon it thus, saying, "If
every spirit were of God, which doth confess in words this, then
is not the Pope himself antichrist."

Answ. Friend, it is one thing to confess the things in words and
another thing to believe them, and to make a life out of them;
and there fore is thy life made out of Christ without thee, by the
operation of his Spirit within thee, yea or no? then in answer
to my bidding people receive no Christ except God's Christ, thou
sayest thus, "That Christ is a mystery, and unto him is light, and
shall be salvation where his person never came." this question
I ask thee, did or doth Christ obtain salvation for any, without
that body which he took of the Virgin? And yet thou sayest, it
cannot be said, here is the place where the Son is not.

I answer: As the Son of God is also very Man, so it may be said,
here is the place where he is not, and there is the place where he
hath not been, though as he is God it is otherwise: lit him that
reads understand.

And now passing by many things that I might justly examine, and
also many unseemly expressions, I come to the next thing, and that
is, where you say, you wrest not the scriptures in John 1:9. But
it is evident, that you do most horribly wrest it, in the you,
though you seem to take it in the plain words, yet would hold,
that that light is the Spirit of Christ, notwithstanding here is
no such thing mentioned in that scripture. For mark, as I have
sometimes said, and now also will say, that that light wherewith
Christ, as he is God, hath lightened every one with, is not the
Spirit of Christ, as is clear, in that some are sensual having not
the Spirit, which they must needs have, if it were given to every
one that comes into the world, and therefore, in that you say, I
say you lay down that scripture false; I say again, that you say
many things which I do know to be blasphemy, as I shall prove
clearly anon, as also I have already. And therefore, to take thee
of from this, I shall say, that Christ as he is a mediator, a Man
between God and man, so he doth not lighten every man that comes
into the world, though as he is God he doth. And this is manifest,
where he often, (as he was Man) saith, These things are spoken to
them that are without in parables; "that seeing they might not see,
and hearing they might not understand," (Luke 8:10). And again,
where Judas (not Iscariot) said; Lord, how is it, that thou wilt
manifest thyself to us, and not unto the world? He saith, "If a
man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him,
and we (I as mediator, and my Father as reconciled in me) will
come unto him, and make our abode with him" (John 14:23). And
again, "No man knoweth him as a father, but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal him (Matt 11:27). But above all, take
that scripture where the Son saith, "I thank thee O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes" (verse 25).
Here the Son and the Father are speaking one to another; the Father
he hides the glorious things of the gospel from the, world (Matt
11:25-27), and the Son he rejoices in so doing. At the same hour
Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and said, "I thank thee, O Father, &c.
Therefore understand thus much, that though Christ as he is God,
doth give to every man a light, which is conscience, otherwise
called nature (Rom 2:14; 1Cor 11;14), yet it doth not follow,
that every man hath enlightening from Christ as he is mediator.
No, Christ as he is mediator doth neither pray for the world (John
17:9), neither doth he give his Spirit to all that are in the world;
for some are sensual, and have it not. But now the argument that
thou dost bring to colour the contrary with, is this; for what
the Father doth, sayest thou, the Son doth also. Answ. Though this
be true, that the Son doth what the Father doth; yet it doth not
appear that either the Father or the son hath given the Spirit to
every one that comes into the world (Jude 19).

Again thou sayest, thou deniest those that say, "That light which
every one hath as he comes into the world, is conscience; though
some call it Christ falsely." Answ. Friend, What wilt thou have it
called; Christ. No, if not conscience, then call it nature itself;
for all have not the Spirit.

But another great argument thou bringest in page 15, is, "The light
of Christ doth convince of sin." Now do you call conscience the
light of Christ? that will convince of sin (John 8:9). And they
being convinced by their own consciences, &c. if thou dost call
the law the light of Christ, that also will convince of or make
known sin; For by the law is the knowledge of sin (Rom 3:20). If
thou dost call even nature itself, the light of Christ; That also
doth shew, that sins are a shame, even those sins which some leap
over (1Cor 11:14), and ruffian-like they will wear long hair,
which nature itself forbiddeth, and is commended for the same by
the apostle. The Spirit of Christ also will convince of sin. That,
because these several things will convince of sin, therefore will
they needs be the Spirit of Christ? Or do they altogether make
but one Spirit of Christ? dost thou profess thyself to walk in the
light, and art not able to know these things; Or, if thou dost
know them art thou so unfaithful as not to tell poor people of
them, who are some of them at their wits end, by reason they are
not enlightened into these things.

Another of thy arguments is, "They saw the eternal power and
Godhead, by that which was made manifest of God in them."

[I reply] The scripture say not so word for word, but thus: "Because
that which might be known of God, was manifested in them." But
how? for he hath shewed it unto them. But how? why the invisible
things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, (which words in thy
charge against me thou didst leave out) but mark: The invisible
things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made. But how then doth
it say, that the knowledge of God is manifested in them? Why,
because God hath shewed it unto them by the things that are made,
even by the creation of the world. so that this scripture holdeth
forth thus much; that the invisible things of God, as his power,
holiness, and common goodness to the sons of men are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made. But how feeble an
argument is this, to prove such a doctrine as this: That every one
hath the Spirit when this light discovers God only by his works
in the world. Friend, if they that know God, because he doth shew
himself to them by his works in the world, have the Spirit of
Christ, then the same argument will serve to speak thus much; that
the devils themselves have the Spirit of Christ, which would be
wonderful blasphemy once to affirm. And friend, the very devils,
both for the knowledge of sin, and also for the knowledge of
God's eternal power and Godhead, have more experience than all the
unregenerate men in the world; and yet have not the least spark
of the Spirit of Christ in them.

Other lame arguments thou tumblest over, like a blind man in a
thicket of bushes, which I pass by. But one thing more thou hast,
and that is this,

Thou askest me "whether I do know this light which god and Christ
hath given to every man" (Rom 2:14; 1Cor 11:14)? First, I deny
that Christ as he is mediator, hath given to every man his Spirit.
And Secondly, I deny, that Christ as he is God hath given to
every one his Spirit; but this I say as I have often said, it is
conscience of nature itself that every one hath, take it in either
of these scripture terms, as I have proved at large. And whereas
thou askest me, "Whether that light, which Christ as he is God hath
lightened every one with that comes into the world, be sufficient
in itself for life and salvation." I answer plainly, no; for then
Christ Jesus needed not to have come into the world to die for
sinners; for every one had that light before Christ did come into
the world.

2. And secondly I answer, it is not able, for then it would have
been a needles thing for Christ to tell his disciples of sending
them his Spirit, to lead them into all truth. The might have said,
why dost thou talk of sending us they Spirit, who have that that
can do the deed already, if that could have done it.

3. Because the scripture saith, "some are sensual, not having the
Spirit." Now a man cannot lay hold on Christ, nor believe in him
savingly without the Spirit, because faith is the work of the
Spirit.

4. Because then it had been in vain for the Lord to have given
the scriptures to teach men out of, either concerning himself or
themselves: Why? because without it, they had a sufficient light
to guide them: that thing must not be so.

And whereas thou asketh, whether the fault be then in God, or in
that thou callest his light, or in the creature? I answer; What
if God willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much patience the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction;
and that he might make know the riches of his glory on the vessels
of mercy, which he had afore (before the world was, Eph 1:4)
ordained unto glory? And secondly, O vain man! What is that to
thee if God should make some vessels to dishonour: hath not the
potter power over the clay, of the same lump to do therewith as
he pleases (Rom 9:16-22).

And where I say, "Christ as he is God hath lightened every one
that cometh into the world:" to it thou givest a glavering answer;
but having touched on this before, I pass it by.

To the next thing, where I say, "men's neglecting this light, or
law, will be sure to damn them, though their obedience to the law
will not save them." Here thou sayest I have confessed truth, (and
I know it is true by experience) and thou commentest on those
things laid down by me thus: "Then surely (sayest thou ) I t
is good not to neglect it; "that is, not to neglect following the
law. To which I answer, as their obedience to the law will not
save them, so their neglect of obedience to the law will be sure
to damn them; these things thou canst not deny. But is this all
the wit thou hast? Because the neglect of the law will be sure to
damn them; therefore wouldst thou put poor souls to follow that
which will not save them? (O wonderful ignorance.) Nay, but thou
shouldest have said, then surely the best course is, for a poor
soul in this case, to fly to the Lord Christ, even the Man Christ
Jesus, who was slain on Mount Calvary for the sins of poor sinners.
And the rather, because he did so willingly, of his own accord
lay down his life for them. Methinks, I say, thou shouldest rather
have said, then lit us follow the Son of Mary, the Man Christ
Jesus, the Lamb of God that takest away the sins of the world,
by his blood on the cross; who is now also at his Father's right
hand making intercession for all those that do come to the Father
by him; but they that are not for the truth, will advance anything
but the truth. And as for that which thou callest the second
clause, which is. The law (sayest thou) must by obeyed.

I answer, Christ Jesus hath done that in his own person, and justified
me thereby, and for my part, I will not labour now to fulfil the
law for justification, least I should undervalue the merits of the
Man Christ Jesus, and what he hath done without me: and yet will
I labour to fulfil, if it were possible, then thousand laws, if
they were so many; An O! let it be out of love to my sweet Lord
Jesus (2Cor 5:14) "for the love of Christ constrains me." And thus
much to thy 16th page.

In the next place, thou art offended with this, because I say,
though Christ doth give a light to every one that comes into the
world, yet it doth not therefore follow, that this conscience,
(or light) is the Spirit of Christ, or the work of grace wrought
in the heart of any believer. This I shall pass also, as having
spoken to it already, only mind thee of they weakness, in that thou
shouldest make this conscience, that Christ hath given to every
man, to be the same with the Spirit of Christ. And thou sayest
further, that the light, that Christ hath lightened every one with,
is the same in nature with the Spirit of Christ. O wonderful! that
a man should be so foolish, and so much besides the truth, as to
compare that nature, or conscience, that is given to every man;
equal to the Spirit of Christ: nay, thou sayest that it is one
with it in nature. Didst thou not blush when thou laidst it down?
if thou didst not, thou mightest have done with shame enough. As
I said before, because thy conscience will convince thee of sin,
therefore the law must be called Christ, or as good as Christ.
What! because the law will convince of sin, therefore the law must
be called Christ. What ignorance is this? Nay, nature itself, that
must have the pre-eminency, even as high as Christ Jesus, because
it can tell a man that it is a shame for him to wear long hair.

Then thou askest me, can there be a surer thing for the creature
to walk by, than by the light of Christ, which thou confessest
every one hath, that cometh into the world. Answer, Friend, to the
law, and to the testimony (sayeth the scriptures) for they testify
of Christ. And if thou or any else, shall leave the scriptures, to
follow the convictions of their own conscience; ye are not like
to know Christ Jesus the Lord, for they may be defiled. And again,
it is through the promises laid down in the scriptures, "that we
might be partakers of the divine nature" (2Peter 1:4), and not by
our following of the law, or conscience (Gal 3:1-4).

But again, where I say, Heathens, Turks, Jews, Atheists, &c. have
that which doth convince of sin, and yet are so far from having
the Spirit of Christ in them, that they delight to do iniquity;
and serve their lust. Upon this thou movest this query; do they,
or I, or any other, serve sin and lust, because Christ hath not
given us light, or because we hate this light.

Ans. This I do really confess, that every Heathen, Turk, or Jew,
in this world, hath a conscience within them, that doth convince
of sin; for the Gentiles which have not the law, that is, not the
law in tables of stone, or written as we have; these do by nature,
the things contained in the law; these having not the law, are a
law unto them selves; which shew the work of the law written in
their hearts, their consciences also bearing them witness, &c.
And all men and women shall be left without excuse, even by the
convictions of their own consciences, or the law. But now that
these things are the Spirit of Christ, that I deny. For conscience
is but a creature, a faculty of the soul of man, which God hath
made. Neither is the law the Spirit of Christ; for the law is not
of faith. They that are of the works of the law, are under the
curse, but they that have the spirit of Christ they are the children
of God, and under grace, and delivered from the curse, as it is
written (Gal 3:10) "As many as are of the words of the law are
under the curse." But what is it to be of the works of the law, or
under the law? Ans. Why to seek to be justified by their obedience
to the law. "Israel which followed after the law of righteousness,"
mark. They that follow after righteousness, do not attain to the
law of righteousness; if they seek it not by faith: but as it were
by the works of the law (Rom 9:30,31). But "Christ hath redeemed
us from the curse of the law, being ( in our nature) made a curse
for us" (Gal 3:10-13).

But whereas thou sayest, this conscience or law, which you would
fain have called the Spirit of Christ, works in all men either to
justify, or condemn. I do plainly deny, that either conscience,
or the law can justify, though they can condemn. Mark, The law is
called the ministration of condemnation, but not of life.

The gospel is called the ministration of life, but not of condemnation.
(2Cor 3:9). The law was given that sin might be discovered. The
gospel was sent, that sin might be taken away. The law worketh
wrath; but the gospel is a gospel of peace (Rom 10). "The law
made nothing perfect" (Heb 7:19). But Christ justifieth from all
those things from which we could not be justified by the law of
Moses (Acts 13:39).

And whereas thou askest me whether any thing doth convince of sin
contrary to, or besides the Spirit of Christ.

I answer. There is conscience, and the law, yea, and nature itself
that doth convince of son; as before I have proved at large. Yet
neither is conscience, that law; or nature itself the Spirit of
Christ; no, but are much inferior to it, as being things of no
glory in respect of it.

And again, that something doth convince of sin besides the Spirit
of Christ, it is evident, for the law saith, "Cursed is every on
e that continueth not in all things which are written in it to do
them" (Gal 3:10). But the Spirit convinceth men of their unbelief,
together with other sins. Now mark, The law also convinceth to
work for life, the Spirit convinceth to believe for life; the law
saith, He that doth not fulfil me, shall be damned. The Spirit
saith, He that believeth in Christ shall be saved. Now observe
the terms of the law and of the gospel, are different one from
another as to justification. If men seek for life by the law;
then the law saith, Fulfil me perfectly, and thou shalt live. The
spirit saith, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save those
that by transgression had broken the law. For, for this cause saith
the Spirit "He (Jesus the Son of Mary, the Man Christ between God
and us 1Tim 2:5) is the mediator of the New Testament." For what?
"that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
that were under the first testament, they which are called might
receive the promise of eternal inheritance" (Heb 9:15). Now
I would not be mistaken; I do not say, that the Spirit of Christ
doth give the least liberty to sin; God forbid. But its convictions
are of a more saving and refreshing nature than the convictions
of the law, and do more constrain the soul to holiness than that.

The law saying, work for life; the Spirit saying, "Now to him that
worketh not, (for life) but believeth on him that justifieth the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness" (Rom 4:5), as
thus, if I should owe to two creditors ten thousand talents; the
one should say unto me, thou owest me five thousand talents, pay
that thou owest; the other should say, thou owest me five thousand
talents, and I frankly and freely forgive thee all. Now these
expressions are contrary one to another: even so is the end of the
convictions of the law, not according to the end of the convictions
of the Spirit of Christ; the one saying, pay me that thou owest,
the other saying, thou art frankly and freely forgiven all.

The next thing thou utterest is, where I say, "Those that are alive
unto sins, have not the Spirit of Christ." But sayst thou, it is
given to every man. Mark, thou sayest, It is given to every man.
The apostle saith, some are sensual, having not the Spirit (Jude
19). Who must we now believe, the Apostle or you? Certainly your
doctrine is not according to truth, but a lie; as is clear, in the
you will affirm, that which the Apostle doth deny.

Then thou sayest, I bring other vain arguments to prove that every
one hath not the Spirit of Christ. This one is enough to prove
it, that the Apostle saith, Some men have it not. But that which
thou callest vain, I am sure neither thou nor any of they fellows,
are able to answer. One is to this purpose; the devils are so
convinced of son, that they did fear the torment that was to come
upon them for their sins; and did fear also that the son of Man
was come to torment them for their sins, and yet the devils have
not the spirit of Christ. so that it is evident, that we may be
convinced of sin, and yet not by the Spirit of Christ. A second
argument which thou callest vain, is this, Man in his coming into
the world, hath his conscience given him, which doth convince of
sin (John 8:9), yet man in his coming into the world, or as he
cometh into the world, hath not the Spirit of Christ given him,
for that must be received ordinarily afterward by the preaching
of the word, which is preached by the ministers and servants of
Jesus Christ (Acts 10:44). "while Peter yet spake" to the people,
"the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word."

But farther, thou sayest, "Until I prove the light of Christ contrary
to the Spirit of Christ, thou wilt say, that every man hath that
which is one in union, and like the Spirit of Christ, even as good
as the Spirit of Christ in its measure."

Answer. Friend, I have proved already that every man hath not the
Spirit of Christ, though they have that which thou dost call the
Spirit of Christ, which is conscience and nature itself. And this
I say again, that thou hast laid open thy weakness very much, to
say that every man hath that which is as good as the Spirit of
Christ, Friend, seeing the scriptures say, some have not the Spirit
of Christ, how durst thou so blaspheme, as to say, then it is as
good as the Spirit of Christ in its measure. Was there ever such a
deal of ignorance discovered at one time by man, as to say, that
every man hath the spirit, or that which is as good as the Spirit;
though the Spirit saith plainly, that some have not the Spirit,
as I have proved plainly (Jude 19). Friend, what is there besides
the Spirit that is as good as the Spirit. Be silent, and say no
more so, lest thou dost through ignorance, or presumption, set
up thy conscience or nature, as high and as good as the Spirit of
Christ, when indeed they are not worthy to be compared with it,
being weak, and not able to do that which is and hath been done
by the Spirit of Christ.

Then thou art offended, because I said the devil doth deceive poor
souls by bidding them listen within, and see if there be not that
which doth convince of sin. friend, all men have not the Spirit,
though they have that conscience that doth convince of son (John
8:9). Now seeing all men have not the Spirit, is it not a great
deceit of the devil to persuade poor souls, that because they are
convinced for son by their own consciences, therefore they have
the Spirit of Christ: surely it is from the devil. Because he
would make thee believe that conscience, which is but a creature,
is the Spirit of Christ, by whom the world was made. Again, because
the soul, being persuaded that it hath the Spirit (when it hath
it not) as all men naturally are without it (Eph 5:13,14), it is
kept off from seeking and begging for it, being already persuaded
(falsely) that it hath it.

And whereas thou sayest, the voice of the gospel is to bid listen
within the heart, as Paul preacheth. I deny that Paul biddeth
listen within. But the scripture that you would fain make shelter
for your error is this, where he saith, "The word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart" (Rom 10:8). That is, The word
of faith which we preach. Now, Friend, faith is that which layeth
hold of, or believeth the gospel. And that his is the meaning
read the next verse: That (saith he) "If thou shalt confess with
thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that
God hath raise him from the dead, thou shalt be saved." so that
it is clear that the word of faith, is to believe assuredly from
the very heart, that God hath raised up Jesus from the dead, out
of the grave into which he was laid by Joseph; and that he was
raised again for my justification (Rom 4:25), as it is written
(1Cor 15), "Moreover brethren (saith he,) I declare unto you the
gospel which I preached unto you" at the first, "which also you
have received, and wherein ye stand, by which also ye are saved,
if ye keep in memory, ( or assuredly believe,) what I preached unto
you, unless ye have believed in vain." but what was that gospel
you preached? why, saith he (verse 3), "I delivered unto you first
of all, that which I also received, how that Christ died for our
sins according to the scriptures; and that he was buried, and that
he rose again the third day according to the scriptures: and that
he was seen of--the brethren after his resurrection," &c. the word
of the gospel, my friend, is, Christ died for our sins according
to the scriptures, and that he rose again according to the
scriptures, and that he is ascended from his disciples, to prepare
a place for them according to the scripture.

That he ever liveth to make intercession in his own person without,
as mediator between God and man, according to the scripture (Heb
7:25).

That he will come again in the clouds with all his mighty angels,
and before him shall all nation be gathered, according to the
scriptures (1Thess 4:16,17; Matt 25:31,32), after which time, his
saints shall be ever with him according to the scriptures.

Again, thou art offended in that I said, Now the poor soul finding
this to be so (that it is convinced of sin) all in haste (if it be
willing to profess) through ignorance of the gospel, claps in with
the motions of its own conscience, which doth command to abstain
from this evil, and to practise that good. Which words of mine
thou corruptest, and wrestest, and layest down in another form,
as are to be seen in thy book, page 18. But now, friend, is not he
ignorant of the gospel, which thinks his own conscience will lead
him to eternal life, by commanding to abstain from this evil, and
practise that good? Surely, if salvation comes by our conscience,
or by the convictions or commands thereof, Christ Jesus died for
nothing (Gal 2:21).

And whereas thou askest, what, and how doth the light of the gospel
work, if not in the conscience. I answer, Though the light of the
Spirit of God and the gospel light is hid, and dith not shine so
much as unto, much less into the consciences of some of them that
be lost (2Cor 4:3,4) that though the light of the gospel dith shine,
and that gloriously too in the hearts of God's elect, yet it dith
not follow, that the convictions of conscience is the gospel; no,
nor the convictions of the law neither. And again, though every
one of God's elect have the light of the glorious gospel shining
in them, what argument is this to prove all men have the light
of the gospel shining in them. No, saith Christ, "I thank thee,
O Father, because thou hast hid these things (the things of the
gospel) from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto
babes" (Matt 12:25). And whereas thou sayest (as I gather by thy
words) that I call conscience the light of Christ, I say, if thou
meanest by these words (the light of Christ) the Spirit of Christ,
I do deny that every man hath it: but if thou callest conscience
the light of Christ, or the highest light that is in an unconverted
man the light of Christ; then, I say, that the highest light that
is in a natural or unconverted man (which you call the light of
Christ) is not able by all its motions an convictions, nor yet
by all the obedience that a man ca yield to these convictions; I
say, they are not able to deliver him from the wrath to come; for
deliverance from that s obtained by the blood of Jesus, which was
shed on the cross, without the gate of Jerusalem (as I have often
said) (Eph 1:7 compared with Heb 13:12). and not any light within
a natural man.

And whereas thou sayest that I said, the devil counterfeits the new
birth by persuading to follow the light of the world. I answer, 3
Thou hast most naughtily belied me. The words that I said (speaking
of the devil before) are these; Now he counterfeits the new birth
(said) by persuading them that it is wrought by following the
light that they brought into the world with them; as is clearly
seen in my book, page 76. Friend, I wonder that you should so
boldly profess yourself to be led by the Spirit of Christ, when
you make it manifest that you are guided by the spirit of Satan.
Was not he a liar? and hast not thou been led by a lying spirit
also, in wresting of my words as thou hast done?

But I do freely declare again, that Satan doth deceive those souls,
whom he persuades the new birth is wrought in, by following the
light they brought into the world with them; for men as they come
into the world, do not receive the Spirit, for it is given to the
elect afterwards; neither have all men the Spirit. And he that
hath the new birth, must have it by, and through the Spirit; as
it is written, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." Therefore, if men do not
bring the Spirit into the world with them; and if nothing without
the Spirit, or nothing but the Spirit, will or can work the new
birth in a man: it must needs follow, that they who think the new
birth is wrought by that light or conscience which they brought
into the world with them, must needs be beguiled by Satan.

I do pass by many of thy raging expressions, which I might justly
charge with much unrighteousness; but I know the time is short,
and then whatsoever thou has done in secret, shall be laid open
upon the house tops, therefore I forbear them.

Again, thou art offended because I said, now Satan makes the soul
believe he is its friend, and that he is a gospel minister (2Cor
11:14), and if the soul will be led by what shall be made known
to it, from the light or conscience within, it shall not need to
fear, but it shall do well, page 76. of my book [153]. I said it
then, and I say it now; and I know that he that doth think to be
born again by following his conscience, or any other light that is
in an unregenerate man, will be deceived, and shall one day know,
that there is a difference between conscience and Christ; between
the light of nature, and the Spirit of God.

Quest. But you may say, how can you prove that conscience is not
of the same nature, of the Spirit of Christ?

Answ. 1. They that are unbelieving, even their conscience is
defiled. Tit. i. 15. But so cannot be the Spirit of Christ.

Answ. 2. Conscience is not of the same nature with the Spirit of
Christ, for conscience may be hardened or seared with an hot iron:
as it is written (1Tim 4:2). But so cannot be the Spirit of Christ.

Answ. 3. Our consciences naturally are evil, "having (saith the
scripture) our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience" (Heb
10:22). But so is not the Spirit of Christ.

But again whereas you said, that I said, they will not speak except
the Spirit move the, &c thou dost falsely speak of me, and dost
corrupt my words; for I said, How they will not speak except their
spirit move them, (I do not say the Spirit of Christ) (said I)
Friend; if you can be lead to life by your own spirit, if your
own spirit will learn you the things of the Spirit of God; and if
you can speak them with and in your own spirit, in the demonstration
that they are spoken, when they are spoken in the Spirit of Christ;
(which all men have not) then say that I speak false things; but
till that time hold your peace. Thus I pass by they 20. page,
leaving many of thy scolding terms to thyself. The next thing you
sayest Is, that I did run but was not sent, like unto my forefathers:
and therefore sayest thou, I do not profit the people at all.
Answ. Which accusation of thine, I shall leave to be taken notice
of by the people of God in the country where I dwell, who will
testify the contrary for me, setting aside the carnal ministry,
with their retinue; who are as mad against me as thyself.

But farther, thou art somewhat distempered, and discontented that
I said, "Many sad and horrible doctrines are vented by you," And
your said, I named nothing. Answ. I need not, thine own speech
betrayeth thee, that thou art one of them, that do such things;
and I need go no further than thy own mouth and doctrine. But if
it will be more satisfaction to tell you wherein, they or your
society do hold sad doctrine I shall.

1. Therefore your society do hold and affirm, that that man which
was hanged on the cross between two thieves, called Jesus; in his
person is within you, contrary to the scripture (Acts 1:11).

2. You say that Christ is crucified within, dead within risen and
ascended within; which also you have no word of scripture to prove.

3. Your society affirm, that the coming of the Spirit into the hearts
of believers do plainly hold forth, that the coming of Christ in
the spirit was before his coming in the flesh; as in 1Peter 1:10,11
where the apostle speaking of the prophets inquiring into the
great salvation which was afterwards to be accomplished, saith,
"searching what, of what manner of time the Spirit of Christ
which was in them did signify, when it testified before hand the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow." Mark,
here is the Spirit of Christ in the prophets, long before the
first coming of Christ in the flesh, which was when he was born
of Mary the Virgin, the Spirit of Christ, saith he, did testify
before hand the suffering of Christ, to the prophets, which were
before Christ came in the flesh, as the scriptures hold forth
plentifully.

4. But again, you deny the second coming of that very Man, with
that very body, which was born of the Virgin Mary; and say, his
second coming is not his coming again personally, but his coming
in the Spirit only; and that is all you look for, when the scripture
saith; That same Jesus (who appeared to his disciples after his
passion (Acts 1:3)), shall so come, even as they did see him depart
from them into heaven; which was a very Man, as well as very God.
And will come again, a very Man, as well as very God, at the end
of the world. For it is that Man; namely, he that was crucified,
whom God raised again, must be the judge of quick and dead (Acts
10:39-42. seriously compared).

5. Again, you say, that every man hath the spirit of Christ, which
is a sad doctrine, because contrary to the scripture (Jude 19).
And you say, there is that in every man which is as good as the
Spirit of Christ; which is a blasphemous doctrine. Besides many
other things which they of your own spirit have most sadly spoken;
which I shall not mention, being so commonly known to the saints
of the Lord, before whom you have openly, and without fear (at
least in shew) spoken. Which will doubtless be laid open to your
sorrow and great amazement, at the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Then thou art offended because I said, I wonder that the Lord doth
not either cause the ground to open her mouth and swallow you up:
or else suffer the devil to fetch you away, to the astonishing
the whole world. Certainly, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram did not so
horribly transgress, as you have it were the astonishment of the
world. Therefore I may well wonder that you are not served so.
Only this I consider, it may be, you have not yet filled up the
measure of your wickedness; therefor is not the hand of God as
yet upon you.

The next thing I take notice of is, that thou findest fault with
mine answer to this question. "But doth not the scripture say,
that it is the Spirit of Christ that doth convince of sin?" Thou
sayest it is a good question, but I have confounded it in the answer,
and not answered plainly. Wherefore I shall not at all stick at
the pains, to give the reader in brief some of the heads of the
answer I then gave to it word for word, or to the same purpose.
The answer was, yes, that Spirit doth convince of sin; but for
the better understanding of this place, I shall lay down this,
said I, That there are two things spoken of in scripture, that do
manifest or convince of sin. First, the law (Rom 3:20). "For by
the law is the knowledge of sin." Secondly, the Spirit of Christ
doth also the same, as it is written, "And when he is come, he will
4convince the world of sin" (John 16:7-9). Now say I, sometimes
the law itself, by its own power doth manifest sin, as in the
case of Judas, who was so far from having the Spirit of Christ,
that the devil had very great possession of him. Which things my
adversary doth wrangle at, yet dares not affirm the contrary: only
saith this, he had the righteous law of God written in his heart:
which thing is not the Spirit of Christ. The law in not of faith.
The law is not the comforter, but rather a tormentor: yet the Spirit
of Christ is a comforter. Again say I, the Spirit of Christ doth
take the law, and doth effectually convince of sin, &c. Then I put
forth another question, saying, "But how should I know whether I
am convinced by the law alone, or whether the law be effectually
set home by the spirit?" To which I answer, when the law doth
convince by its own power, it doth convince only of sins against
the law; as lying, swearing, stealing, &c. pronouncing an horrible
curse against thee if thou fulfil it not, and there leaves thee,
but gives thee no power to fulfil it completely and continually,
which thou must do, if thou be saved thereby. With which
my adversary is much offended; also saying, that I am confounded
in my discourse, and so leaves me, confuting none of my words by
holy scripture, but falls a railing, because I reckon Pharisees
and Quakers together.

Only this much he saith; That I make it a light thing to be
convinced by the law, and then brings in that scripture; "this is
the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light;" cunningly corrupting of it, and would
fain have you understand it as spoken of the law, when the son of
Mary speaks it of himself, which was not the law, but the Saviour.
And that he might the better go away undiscerned, he saith, and
the law is light, therefor the light is the law (saith he). But
I perceive that he doth not yet understand the difference between
the light of the law, and the light of the gospel; but would
fain make the law and Christ one Saviour: the one being but only
a condemning light, and nothing else; the other a saving comfortable
light. And whereas thou sayest, I make it a light thing to be
convinced by the law, I answer; the law is good, if a man use it
lawfully; and I hour it in its place; yet if they make a Saviour
if it, they make an idol of it, and wrest it out of its proper
place. Also, if they think that it is Christ, they are much deceived.

But farther, he put me to prove any such distinction in scripture
as that there is anything made mention of therein that doth convince
of son, beside the Spirit of Christ: which thing I have already
answered, where I said the scripture saith, "By the law is the
knowledge of sin" (Rom 2:20), and again, doth not even nature
itself teach you, that it is a shame for a man to wear long hair
(1Cor 11:14), and also conscience, which are neither of them the
spirit of Christ, but much inferior to the same; yet this also
convinceth of sin (John 8:9).

But to the other thing, which is the answer that I give in my book
to this objection: But I am not only convinced of my sins (may
some say) but have also some power against my sins; so that I do
in some measure abstain from the sins forbidden in the law. And
because I say, this thou mayest have and do, as thou thinkest,
perfectly too [as thou thinks, mark that] as those fond hypocrites,
called Quakers [think] that they also do, and yet be but a natural
man. Here my adversary is very much offended, and calls me perverter
of the right way of the Lord; and saith, Shew me any natural man
in the scripture that hath done it. Whereas had he been but willing
to have laid down the scripture I brought to prove it, he needed
not to have looked for a second answer. But because he would have
it again, I will therefore shew you, that natural men merely by
nature may be convinced, and abstain from those things forbidden in
the law, and think they do it perfectly, nay, they do the things
contained in the law. For saith the apostle (Rom 2:14), "when
the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature [mark, do by
nature] the things contained in the law, these, [the Gentiles]
having not the law, are a law unto themselves." Mark; the Gentiles
do by nature the things contained in, or held forth, or made mention
of by the law; the light also that they have, it is themselves,
being a law to themselves; that is, their consciences (being of
themselves) bearing them witness and their thoughts the meanwhile
accusing, or else excusing one another (verse 15), though they
cannot be saved thereby.

Again, when Paul was a natural man, and a persecutor of Jesus Christ,
he saith of himself, that then he was, "touching the righteousness
which is in the law, blameless" (Phil 3:6). And whereas thou
sayest, thou hadst rather choose to be one of those who abstain
from those things forbidden in the law, and to have power over
sin, than to live in the transgression of the law; this is fair
spoken, and it doth shew that thou art under the convictions of
the law; and if it be no worse, I fear thy state the less, though
it be bad enough; yet this I say, If thy soul be not saved freely
by the blood of that man who was crucified on Mount Calvary,
and by his merits alone done by himself in his own person, thou,
notwithstanding wilt fall short of eternal life. for by the works
of the law, shall no flesh living be justified (Rom 3:20). Though
by it be the knowledge of sin, and a command to abstain from the
same. And thus have I spoken to thy 21 page.

But farther thou sayest, that thou fearest I worship the name Mary,
because I mention her name so much.

[I reply] If thou hadst said, I worship her Son, thou hadst said
truly (I hope) But is not thy spite more against her son, than her?
I doubt it is; for neither thou, nor they companions can endure
that one should say, he is still the same that was born Mary, flesh
and bones, a very man, now absent from his people, though in them
in his Spirit.

Again, thou sayest I said, "That as he is God, Christ lighteneth
every man that comes into the world; "which thing again I say. What
then? Then say you, I will mind you of one scripture which you
yourself have quoted, which saith "The law is light" (Prov 6:23).
Therefore sayest thou, "The light is the law." Give me leave here
to take thy words in twain:

First, if when thou sayest, then the law is light, thou mean, the
light of the law is the light of the law, and no more, thou sayest
right. But if thou mean the light of the law, is the light of the
gospel, or the Spirit of Christ, I must needs reprove thee. For I
tell thee again, the law is not of faith, the law makes nothing
perfect (Heb 7:19). The law is but a weak and unprofitable thing,
as to justification (Heb 7:18), though as I said before, it is
good if it be used lawfully; which is, not to seek or look for
justification thereby, nor yet to say, it is the sprit of Christ.

Then farther thou art offended, because I said, when the spirit of
Christ convinceth, it convinceth of more sins than the sins against
the law. Friend, will the law shew a man that his righteousness
is sin and dung? No, for though the law will shew a man that
his failing in the acts of righteousness is sin; yet I question,
whether the law will shew, that a man's own righteousness is sin.
For there is in scripture [that which] saith it doth, or can.

Secondly, shew me, if thou canst, that the sin of unbelief is spoken
against in all the ten commandments, or that called the moral law.
But now the Spirit of Christ convinceth of unbelief, that is, it
sheweth, that if men do not believe, that they have redemption by
the obedience of that man who was laid in the manger, hanged on
the cross, &c. I say, it sheweth, that those who do not lay hold
on what he hath done and suffered without them in his own body
on the tree (through the operation of his Spirit, which he hath
promised to give to them that ask him) or else they have not
yet been convinced of the sin of unbelief, and so are still in a
perishing condition; notwithstanding their strict obedience, to
the light within them, or to the law. And now tell me, you that
desire to mingle the law and the gospel together, and to make of
both one and the same gospel of Christ: did you ever see yourselves
undone and lost, unless the righteousness, blood, death, resurrection
and intercession of the man Christ Jesus (in his own person) was
imputed to you? and until you could by faith own it as done for
you, and counted yours by reputation, yea, or no? Nay rather, have
you not set up your consciences, and the law, and counted your
obedience to them better, and more value, that the obedience of
the son of Mary without you, to be imputed to you? and if so, it
is because you have not been savingly convinced by the Spirit of
Christ, of the sin of unbelief.

Other things thou dost quarrel against, but seeing they are in
effect the same with the former, I pass them by; and shall come to
the next thing thou dost think to catch me withal, and that is;
because I say, that "God only is the Saviour, there is none besides
him." Therefore sayest thou, how contrary is this to that in p.
24, where I say, How wickedly are they deluded, who own Christ no
otherwise that as he was before the world began. Now this in no
contradiction as thou wouldest have it; for though I say there
is none but God our Saviour, yet I did also then in my book shew
how he was our Saviour, namely, "in that he came into the world,
being born of a virgin, made under the law, that he might redeem
them that were under the law, by his obedience in that nature,
by suffering in that nature, by his rising again in that nature,
and by carrying that nature into heaven with him," as the scriptures
at large declare; and therefore, though I say God is our Saviour,
and none besides him; yet they that own him to be the Saviour no
otherwise than as he was before the world began, are such as deny
that he is come in the flesh, and so are of antichrist (1John
2) For before God could actually be a Saviour, he must partake
of another nature than the divine, even the nature of man (Heb
2:14,15).

Again, thou sayest, it is a sander put upon the Quakers, to say,
they slight the resurrection: Ans. What say you, do you believe
the resurrection of the body after it is laid in the grave? Do you
believe that the saints that have been this four or five thousand
years in their graves shall rise, and also the wicked, each one
with that very body wherein they acted in this world; some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting contempt? Answer plainly,
and clear yourselves, but I know you dare not, for you deny these
things.

But if you speak doubtfully, or covertly in answer there unto; I
doubt not but God will help me to find you out, and lay open your
folly; if I shall live till another cavil by you be put forth
against the truth.

The next thing thou cavillest at is, that query raised from (Eph
4:10). and thou sayest I have not answered it. You should have
answered it better, or else have confuted that answer I gave unto
it, and then you had done something: But the great thing that
troubles thee is, because I say, (further in my book) he that
ascended from his disciples, was a very man, "Handle me and see;
saith Christ, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me
have." Now let the adversary shew by the scripture (said I) that
there is in them any place called heaven, which is able to contain
a man of some four or five foot long (or a competent man of flesh
and bones) for the space of fifteen or sixteen hundred years, but
that above the clouds, which troubles thee so, that it makes thy
tongue run thou canst not tell how; but know, that when the son
of man shall come from heaven to judge the world in righteousness,
that which thou callest foolishness now, thou wilt find a truth
thereby to thy own wrong, if thou close not in with him, who said,
"Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye
see me have" (Luke 24:39).

Another thing that thou art troubled at, is, in that I do reckon the
Quakers to be of the deluding party; when alas, all men that have
eyes to see; may easily discern, that you are of the generation,
as will appear in part by your own expressions, both now, and
also at other times. But that you may take off the brand from
yourselves, you say, that the false prophets and antichrist, were
in the apostle days, as though there should be no false prophets
now, when the very time we live in doth manifestly declare, and
hold forth, that there are many, who at this day seek to beguile
unstable souls, of which sort you are not the least, though for
ought I can learn as yet, you are the last, (that are come into
the world) but that you may the better shift it form yourselves,
you say, that in those days there was not a Quaker heard of; namely,
in the days of John. Friend, thou hast rightly said, there was not
a Quaker heard of indeed, though there were many Christians heard
of then. By this you yourselves do confess, that you are a new
upstart sect, which was not at other times in the world, though
Christian saints have been always in the world. Friend, here like
a man in the dark, in seeking to keep thyself out of one ditch,
thou art fallen into another; instead of proving yourselves no
false prophets, you prove yourselves no Christians, saying, There
was not a Quaker heard of then. But if Quakers had been Christians,
then they would have been heard of the glory of God, and his
Christ.

Again to defend thyself thou throwest the dirt in my face, saying;
IF we should diligently trace thee, we should find thee in their
steps, meaning false prophets, through fained words, through
covetousness making merchandise of souls, loving the wages of
unrighteousness.

Friend, dost thou speak this as from thy own knowledge, or did any
other tell thee so? However, that spirit that led thee out this
way, is a lying spirit. For though I be poor, and of no repute in
the world, as to outward things; yet through grace I have learned
by the example of the apostle to preach the truth; and also to
work with my hands, both for mine own living, and for those that
are with me, when I have opportunity. And I trust that the Lord
Jesus, who hath helped me to reject the wages of unrighteousness
hitherto, will also help me still, so that I shall distribute that
which God hath given me freely, and not for filthy lucre's sake.
Other things I might speak in vindication of my practice in this
thing: but ask of others, and they will tell thee that the things
I say are truth: and hereafter have a care of receiving anything
by hearsay only, lest you be found a publisher of those lies which
are brought to you by others, and so render yourself the less
credible; but be it so.

And as for your thinking, that to drink water,5 and wear no hatbands,
is not walking after your own lusts; I say, that whatsoever men do
make a religion out of, having no warrant for it in the scripture,
is but walking after their own lusts, and not after the Spirit of
God. Thus have I passed thy 23d page.

And lest you should think that the Quakers are not such as condemned
me and others for preaching according to the scriptures; as you
would fain clear your selves of this charge laid against you in
my book, by your saying, you deny the accusation to be true upon
any of the Quakers. I shall therefore tell you of your sister Anne
Blackly, who did bid me in the audience of many, "To throw away
the scriptures." to which I answered, "No, for then the devil
would be too hard for me."

And again, because I said, The man Christ Jesus was above the
clouds and the heavens, now absent from his people in the world,
touching his bodily presence; she said, I preached up an idol,
and used conjuration and witchcraft. which things I should rather
have desire her to repent of, than to make her a public example
for others to take warning by; but that it is expedient that your
folly be laid open, that others may fear to do as you have done.

But farther, thou chargest me with a loud crying out against Christ
within. This is thy throwing of dirt in my face again, for I have
said it often, that if any man have not the Sprit of Christ he is
none of his.

Again thou sayest that in page 203, I do take in hand to prove or
discover that the doctrine of Christ within, is a false opinion.

Thou dost also here speak falsely of me, for all that I take in hand
to prove, is this, that they hold a false opinion (and principles
too) who hold up a Christ within, in opposition to Christ without,
who is the Saviour; as doth plainly appear by my following discourse,
if you read from page 203 to the end of my book.

But in the next place, after much railing, thou comest to the place
where I again ask this question, "doth not the scripture make
mention of a Christ within?"

To which I answer, Yes, and he that hath it not is note of his. But
to lay open my folly at last thou sayest, Doth not the scripture
say, Christ is within you, except ye be reprobates? and is not
this thus much, are not all they reprobates (say you) but they in
whim Christ is within?

Ans. They are indeed reprobates who have not Christ within them;
but now, how is thy folly manifest? that in one place thou shouldest
confess some are reprobates, who have not Christ within; and yet
in page 18, of thy book thou sayest, it is given to every man.
And in page 26, of thy book, thou sayest, that a measure of the
Spirit is given to every man, and is given within him too, though
the scripture declareth the contrary, and thyself also now at
last. It is well thou dost recant so much, as to eat thy first
words at the last, or at least to show thyself unstable in judgment:
Friend, thou mayest see, the more thou dost fight against the
truth, the more thou foilest thyself: Partly by helping of it,
and partly by contradiction thyself.

One thing more thou dost befool thyself with; and that is, in that
thou in the first place sayest thou ownest the words in my book,
and yet hath spent some four sheets of paper to vent thy thoughts
against them.

But peradventure thou wilt say; those words that I own are not those
that I speak against, but the other. to which I answer, There are
many things in my book spoken of by me that are truth, which if
you own, you must leave professing your self a Quaker. As,

1. That that man that was born of the virgin Mary, called Jesus
(I say you will not own) that he in his own person, by himself
without us, die completely bring in everlasting life for us, by
offering up himself once for all upon the cross.

2. That Christ who wrought out redemption for his children, did
after he had wrought it out, go away from them, and not into them
in his person.

3. That he ever liveth, that very man to make intercession in his
person, in the presence of his Father without, until the end of
the world.

4. That that very man who did go away from his disciples into
heaven, will come again personally the same man the second time,
and before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall judge
them for their sins: and take his to himself, who shall soul and
body be with him to all eternity; these things (I say) thou couldest
not own, though they are the truth of God. But leaving thee to the
great God, who will give thee according to thy works, in this as
in other things: I shall come to thy answers to my queries.

Query 1. The first query that I propounded is, If thou sayest that
every man hath a measure of the Spirit of Christ within him, why
say the scriptures, "Some are sensual, having not the Spirit." And
when Christ telleth his disciples, of sending them the Spirit, he
saith, the world cannot receive it. Here in the first place thou
hast not only answered deceitfully, but hast also corrupted my
words in laying down the query, in that thou didst leave out some
words, for thou didst lay it down thus: "If thou sayest that every
man hath a measure of the Sprit of Christ within him, why say the
scriptures, some are sensual, having not the Spirit:" and Christ
saith, "The world cannot receive it." (Reader, compare them both
together.)

Now thy answer, is, "Some are sensual, having not the spirit,
because they receive it not, and some cannot receive it, because
they believe not on him from whence it comes." Yet sayest thou,
"The measure of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal,"
as the scriptures say: when there is no scripture faith, a measure
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. But again,
see here thy strange confusion. 1. Say, some have it not. 2. To
say every man hath it. but you would make a difference between
having and receiving: but I tell thee, he that hath not received
it, hath it not (Jude 19).

Query 2. My second query was, "What is the church of God redeemed
by from the curse of law? Is it by something done within them,
or by something done without them?" If you say, it is redeemed by
something that worketh in them, then why did the man Christ Jesus
hang on the cross on Mount Calvary, without the gate of Jerusalem,
for the sins of his children? And why do the scriptures say, "that
through this man is preached to us the forgiveness of sins?"

The answer thou givest is, "The church of God is redeemed by
Christ Jesus, which is revealed in all believers. and Christ Jesus
wrought in them mightily; and it was he that wrought in them to
will and to do."

This is plain scripture, and the man Christ Jesus (sayest thou) hanged
on the cross on Mount Calvary: because, they wickedly judged him
to be a blasphemer, and through their envy persecuted him to death;
because he bare witness against them, and as in their account he
died, and hanged on the cross, for an evil doer. And this is one
ground (at least) why he hanged on the cross, &c.

Ha Friend? I had thought thou hadst not been so much hardened; art
thou not ashamed thus to slight the death of the Man Chris Jesus
on the cross; and reckon it not effectually for salvation, but
sayest, the church is redeemed by Christ Jesus which is revealed
within. and to confirm it, thou dost also corruptly bring in two
scriptures.

The one saith, "Whereunto I also labour according to his working,
which worketh in me mightily." By which word Paul signifies thus
much, "That as God was with him in the ministry of the word, so
did he also strive according to his working which wrought in him
mightily." what is this to the purpose (See Col 1:26-30)? And
also, the other scripture makes nothing to prove, that the church
of God is redeemed by Christ within, as he is within. Only you
must corrupt the scriptures, and be transform (though ministers
of darkness) into an angel of light, if you will do any mischief.

And now, that thy answer is false, I shall clearly prove. Fist,
because thou deniest that redemption was wrought out for sinners
by the Man Christ Jesus on the cross, or tree, on Mount Calvary;
when the scripture saith plainly, that when he did hang on the
tree, then did he bear all our sins there in his own body (1Peter
2:24). And secondly, being within; when the work of the Spirit
of Christ in believers, is to make known to the soul by dwelling
within, which way and how they were redeemed by the Man Christ
Jesus on the cross. And this I prove farther, because when thou
art forced to answer to these words, why did the Man Christ Jesus
hang on the cross on Mount Calvary for the sins of his children?
Thou sayest, because they wickedly judged him to be a blasphemer.
Friend, I did not ask thee why the Jews did put him to death? But
why was he crucified there for the sins of his children? But thou
willing to cover over thine error, goest on cunningly saying, and
though their envy they persecuted him to death, for an evil doer.
This is one ground at least, &c.

Friend, but that thou art ashamed to own the gospel of Jesus Christ,
thou wouldest have said, he was crucified there for the sins of
the world; and by his offering up of himself upon the cross, he
did for ever perfect them that are sanctified. Nay, thou wouldest
have studied to exalt his dying there; first, by shewing what a
sad condition we were in without it; Secondly, by holding forth
the manifold and great privileges that we have by his dying for
us there. But thou art at enmity against the things of God, as is
clearly seen by those that have indeed the spirit of God in them,
and are enabled thereby to discern you. and though you say, there
is no other that can forgive sin, but the blood of god. Yet thou
deniest, that the blood of him, who was, and is truly god as well
as Man, Christ Jesus: I say, thou deniest that his blood that was
shed without Jerusalem Gates, doth wash away sin from the saints
of God: and cunningly (though not at this time uttered) concluding
that the blood of God was shed for sin on a cross within. If it
be not so, then call me liar; but it will clearly appear so to be
in your answer to my third query.

Query 3. What scripture have you to prove, that Christ is, or was
crucified within you, dead within you, risen within you, ascended
within you?

Thy answer is, There is no scripture that mentions every of our names
in particular. and thy standing of us, so I judge. But Christ is
within us, that we do not deny, and he is the Lamb that was slain
in the streets of the great city, which is spiritually called Sodom,
and Egypt (mind spiritually) and he is now risen, and ascended;
this we know, and leave thee to receive a further answer from them
that are led by a spirit of delusion.

Friend, How dost thou run about the bush, seeking to scrabble up
an answer, but findest not a right one, and wouldest also fain hold
out, that Christ is, or was crucified within, dead within, risen
and ascended within; but seeing thou canst not with or by the
scriptures give an answer; then see in thyself left of them,
through the strength of carnal reason, thou goest about this way.
Is there any of our names made mention of in scripture, or to that
purpose, and wouldst fain infer from thence, that because we have
names, though not mentioned in scripture, therefore, Christ is,
and was crucified within, though not mentioned in the scriptures.
Friend, they sophistry deceives thee.

The second Argument, which is like the first, is this, He is the
Lamb slain in the streets of the great city, spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt. Now from the word "spiritually," thou wouldest
willingly infer also, that Christ is and was crucified within,
dead within, and risen within you, and therefore thou sayest, mind
spiritually. Friend, I may well mind thy spiritual wickedness, by
which thou wouldest willingly cover thy heresy, but it will not
be. Though thou dare not speak plainly in so many words, yet the
thoughts of thy heart are made manifest, by the words that flow
from thee.

Ah Friend! That thou couldest but close with the truth, and venture
thy soul upon what was done by Jesus on the cross without the
gates of Jerusalem, for it is by and through that blood that was
there shed that we have redemption (Heb 13:12 compare with Col
1:20), and remission of sins (Eph 1:7 and 1Peter 2:24).

Query 4. My fourth query was, Is that very Man that was crucified
between two thieves, whose name was Jesus the Son of Mary, is he
the very Christ of God, yea, or nay?

Thy Answer is, Yes, he is the very Christ of God, which was before
the world was, by whom the world was made, who was made manifest
from Mary's womb, and was persecuted to death by the Scribes and
Pharisees, in whose steps thou treadest in asking subtile questions
to ensnare the innocent, as they did. Read thy example (sayest
thou) and thyself to be an enemy to God's Christ.

This Answer is doubtfully given, I did not ask thee whether he
was the Christ of God, that was before the world was; but I asked
thee whether he was the Christ of God, that did hang between two
thieves on Mount Calvary. Now I know the Christ of God was before
the world was; but thou art afraid to look upon him, as suffering
on the cross on Mount Calvary, between two thieves for our sins.
But contrary-wise, wouldst willingly own him to be no otherwise,
but as he was before the world, which thing is very dangerous;
for he that doth so, doth lay aside all things, that in his own
person he did in the flesh that he took from the Virgin Mary, as
to justification and salvation; only supposing him to be but an
example, and so bespatters all his merit and righteousness, by
your false conclusions, which in his own person he accomplished
for our justification.

And Friend, hadst thou not been afraid of thyself, thou wouldst
have been so far from calling these my queries, subtil questions,
that thou wouldst have owned them, and have given a sober Christian
answer to them, instead of a railing accusation. But it matters
not, it hath but made thee shew thyself the more, which peradventure
for a time might otherwise have lien hid.

Query 5. My fifth query was, "Is that very man with that very
body within you, yea, or no?" to which thou answerest: "The very
Christ of God is within us, we dare not deny him; and we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, as the Ephesians
were: they that are led with a spirit of delusion, shall answer
the rest of this thy query, if they will."

Thy answer is nothing to the question, for I did not ask, whether
the Spirit of Christ was in thee? (though I question the truth of
that) But I asked you whether that very Man, with that very body,
(or the body of Christ that was hanged on the cross) be within you?
But I see you are minded to famble,6 and will not answer plainly.
But thou answerest, saying, "We are members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones, as the Ephesians were." This is nothing
to the purpose neither; for it is one thing for a man to be a
member of the flesh and bones of Christ, and another thing to have
the flesh and bones of Christ within him. What, because believers
are members one of another, must they therefore be also one in
another? No. Even so, though a believer be a member of the body,
flesh and bones of Christ; it doth not therefor follow, that
Christ, flesh and bones is within him. But thou art loth to discover
thyself in plain terms, though thou art made manifest full sore
against thy will; for thou dost here also, though very cunningly,
signify, that thou ownest Christ no otherwise, but as he is
within. And to own him no otherwise, is still against the gospel
and faith of the Apostles, who said, they were absent from him
while they were at home in the body, or here below (2Cor 5:6).

Query 6. My sixth query was this, "Was that very Jesus, that was
born of the Virgin Mary, a real man of flesh and bones after his
resurrection out of Joseph's sepulchre, yea, or nay. The scriptures
say he was; and if so, then did that man go away from his disciples,
and not into them, as the scriptures declare; or did he with that
body of flesh go into his disciples, as some fond dreamers think."

Thy answer is, What the scripture speaks of Christ, we own to be
truth, and own him to be what the scriptures speak of him; and all
men's imaginations of him we deny, and their false interpretations
of the scripture concerning him. and let the fond dreamers, who
err in their thoughts, be reproved; for we dare own nothing but
what the Spirit of the Lord bears witness of according to the
scriptures. And thus far I and answer in behalf of the Quakers;
and let them that are led with a spirit of delusion answer the
rest, which concerns themselves.

This answer hath some pretended fairness in it. But yet we know
you, that you can wrest the scriptures to your own destruction; and
that is clear, in that though you say you own him as the scriptures
speak of him, yet you deny him as the scriptures speak of him in
part. And if at any time you plead on truth, it is that you might
by your corrupt dealing with that, clash against another: as for
instance: You profess you own Christ within, but withal, with that
doctrine you sill smite against the doctrine of Christ Jesus in
his person without, and deny that though that is a truth, as is
also the other. You do use the truth of the resurrection of saints,
from a state of nature, to a state of grace, to fight against that
truth of the resurrection of the bodies of saints out of their
graves; together with other things that I might add, as you
holding forth the intercession of the Spirit of Christ within,
in opposition to the intercession of Christ in his person without
in the heavens. Which things being thus done, they shew forth a
great deal either of ignorance or presumption, knowingly to fight
against the truth. And in this that thou answerest so generally,
and not particularly to the question, it is evident that thou dost
not plainly declare thy mind, but dost keep that in thy bosom,
which thou darest not manifest to the world.

Query 7. My seventh query was, "Hath that Christ that was with God
the Father before the world was, no other body but his church?"
If you say No, as it is your wonted course; then again I ask you,
"what was that in which he did bear our sins, was, or is, the church
of god, yea, or no?" Again, if you say he hath no other body but
his church, then I ask, What that was that was taken down from
the cross? But here thou puttest a stop to the rest of my words,
with an &c.

Thy answer is, I this thou hast not only queried, but slandered;
therefore thy slander (sayest thou) I do remove. It is our wonted
course, sayest thou, to say, that Christ hath no other body but
his church. thou art here a false accuser. But we say, the church
is Christ's body; and it is sufficient for salvation to know
Christ Jesus to be head in us, and over us, and ourselves to be
members of his body; which thou sayest is his church. And what
thou intendest by making so many foldings in one query, sayest
thou, it may be judged it is to insnare; and in that thou answerest,
thou answerest thyself for us in some things, that thou mightest
have a further ground to lay a deeper snare; we do deny thee and
thy spirit, and see thee to be only feeding in thy imaginations
upon the report of things, without the life: And thy religion
stands in disputes and controversies, and queries, and many words.
But our religion stands in the exercise of a pure conscience towards
God, and towards man; whether we speak, or be silent: These are
thy words.

Now in my query thou sayest I slander, in that I say, you Quakers
allow of no other body of Christ; but the Church of Christ; yet
dost thou not clear thyself at all, only thou wouldest say something
to dazzle the eyes of the ignorant. But friend, if thou wouldest
have made it appear that I slandered in saying, you own on other
body but the church; you should have said yes, we do own this,
that Christ hath a body that is now in glory, ascended from his
disciples, according to the scripture (Acts 1:3 compared with verses
9-11). But thou dost only fling up a few words into the air, that
thou mightest thereby puzzle thy simple reader. But I bless God,
for my part I do see thee, that thou dost, like a beguiled man,
seek by all means to beguile others. And whereas thou sayest, It
is sufficient to salvation, to know Christ Jesus as head in us,
and over us. To this I answer, whatsoever thy meaning is by these
words, yet there are none shall be saved, but those who through
the mighty operation of the Spirit of Christ, are enabled to apply
what the man Christ Jesus the Son of Mary hath done and suffered,
and is now a-doing for sinners and saint, (and for him) in the
presence of his Father, now ascended in his body of flesh and
bones, from his children which are alive in this world. I say, there
are none shall be saved, but those that are thus established, or
shall be so, as is clear from these (1Peter 1:18,19; 2:24; 3:18,22.;
4:1; 2Peter 1:17; Heb 7:24,25; 10:7,9; 13:12; 1Tim 2:5,6; Eph
1:7; Acts 13:37-39) with many other scriptures. And again, when
you say, I answer you in something, if you mean, that the body
in which he did bare the sins of his children, is his church (for
that is partly my query,) then I do say, that your doctrine is
desperate and devilish; and you do thereby undervalue the death,
blood, resurrection an ascension, intercession and second coming
again of that man for salvation; and therefore for a better
satisfaction to all who may read your book, I entreat you to
answer, "Did he bear our sins in that body which is his church,
or did he bear our sins in that body that did hang on the cross
on Mount Calvary?" Answer plainly I beseech you.

And now friend, passing by the rest of thy brawlings, I shall come
to thy several queries, and shall answer to them in the simplicity
of my soul, not laying down any doubtful expressions, but in all
plainness, and not as you do, for the better understanding of them
by those that read them.

These be the Quaker's Queries, and my Answers to them.

Query 1. "Is any man justified in the sight of God, but he that
followeth Christ; and is it not a work to follow Christ, yea or
nay, and what is the sight of God."

Ans. He that followeth Christ; aright, must first believe in Christ;
for how shall they follow him, in whom they believe not. Now then
the scripture saith, He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting
life (John 3:16-18), so then we are justified by believing; and
if so, then to follow Christ is rather a fruit of our believing,
that justification itself. And whereas you ask, What is the sight
of God? I answer, To be justified in the sight of God by Jesus
Christ, is for God to look on such poor creatures as we are; as
complete, without spot or wrinkle, in the obedience of the man
Christ Jesus; who otherwise could not behold them in love, because
of their iniquity (Hab 1:3).

Query 2. "Whether will that faith justify a man which hath not
works, seeing the scripture, or the Apostle saith, faith without
works is dead; and what is that which worketh faith; and where is
it, within, or without?"

Ans. That faith that hath not works is dead, being alone. Yet it
doth not follow, that all that have works, have faith. No; but
contrary-wise, men may have works, yea, the works of the law of
God too, and yet be under the curse (Gal 2:10-13); which they could
not be if they had saving faith. So then, if faith without works
is dead; and again, if men may have works, and yet no faith, no
saving faith, I mean: Then it will be good to inquire, what it is
to have a right faith, which doth bring forth right good works;
and who have works without a right faith. And

(1.) A right saving faith, is, for a man to be enabled of God's
holy Spirit, to lay hold on what the man Christ hath done in his
won person, when he was in the world? as his birth, righteousness,
death, blood, resurrection, ascension, and intercession; and to
apply the virtue and merit thereof to himself, so as to see himself
saved thereby (Rom 4:24,25). Being justified freely by his grace:
How? Even through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Whom
God hath set forth to be a propitiation, or reconciler, through
faith in his blood, &c. Again, "Be it known unto you,--that through
this man is preached unto the forgiveness of sins: And by him all
that believe: (Mark, all that believe; namely, in his blood which
was shed on Mount Calvary) are justified from all things, from which
ye could not be justified by the law of Moses" (Acts 13:38,39).
If the faith that applies these things be of the operation of
God, it is very much accompanied with good works. "For the love
of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead, and that he died for all, that they
which live (namely by the faith of this, that Christ died for all
(Gal 2:29)), should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
him which died for them" (2Cor 5:14,15). But

(2.) they that deny the merits of the birth, death, righteousness,
blood, &c. of the man that was born of Mary, which he fulfilled
in his own person, by himself (Heb 1:3). I say, they that do not
venture their souls on these glorious, mysterious truths, but deny
the belief of them to be sufficient of themselves to save from
hell, and all other things, and doth expect that salvation should
be obtained by some thing that worketh in them, by working in
them. It is impossible that these, though they may be, touching
the righteousness of the law blameless, (as Paul was while he was
a persecutor (Phil 3:6)), to be saved hereby. Wherefore? because
they seek it not by the faith of Christ, but as it were by the
works of the law (Rom 9:30,31).

And whereas you ask me, "What is that which worketh faith? And
where is it, within or without?" I answer, That which worketh
saving faith, is the holy spirit of God, which is renewed through
the hearing of the word, preached by the apostles or ministers of
Jesus Christ: Now the Spirit when it doth work, it entereth into
the soul, and as I said before, doth enable the soul to believe,
and lay hold on the merits of the son of Mary, Jesus Christ. For
saith he, when he is come, he shall glorify me, for he shall take
of mine, and shew it unto you (John 16:14).

Query 3. "Whether any be justified but he that is born of God? And
whether doth he that is born of God commit sin? And is that within
the creature, or without, that worketh the new birth?"

Ans. Justification may be taken two ways, (1.) either in the sight
of God, or in the sight of the soul, or creature; my meaning is,
that all that are or shall be saved, are justified in the sight
and foreknowledge of God before the foundation of the world (Eph
1:4). According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world, &c. Having predestinated us to the us to the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ unto himself. And again, "Moreover
whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified" (Rom 8:30). Mark, all these thing are spoken as being
already done; predestinated, called, justified, glorified. He
doth not say, they shall be, but he hath done it, that is, in and
according to the foreordination of God. (2.) Saints are said to
by justified in their own sight or knowledge, as when God doth
make manifest to the soul, what he had determined before should
be done. "Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee." this is
justification in the sight of the creature. And whereas you ask
me, "do they that are born of God commit sin?" To this I answer,

They shall never commit the sin against the Holy Ghost, as is the
meaning of that place (1John 5:16-18). There is a sin unto death,
and there is a sin not unto death.--He that is born of God sinneth
not, but keepeth himself; and that wicked one, (mark, that wicked
one, the sin unto death,) toucheth him not: But they that are
born of God notwithstanding, do daily sin, as it is evident (John
3:2). "In many things we offend all," saith he, I and you, all of
us. And again, if we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves,
and (instead of having no sin) the truth is not in us (1John
1:8). And who can say, my heart is clean? There is none righteous,
no not one. And again, "There is not a must man upon earth that
doeth good, and sinneth not" (Eccl 7:20). And I am confident, that
while some would persuade others that they have no sin, their own
consciences tell them they lie; and if it be not so in the rest,
it is because they are hardened, and given to believe a lie.

As to the latter part of your query, I answer; The new birth
is wrought through hearing of the word preached. And yet not by
conscience, nor by the obedience to the law, or dictates of nature;
but by the Spirit coming into the soul, and shewing its lost
condition without the obedience of the Jesus of Mary, the Son
of God; and his freeness and willingness to communicate, or give
himself, and all his things unto it; which being done, the man is
thereupon given up to god, and is become a new creature. I might
spend much time in speaking to this, but I forbear, because of
itself it is enough to fill up a small volume.

Query 4. "If Christ hath enlightened all men as he is God (as thou
confessest) then hath he not enlightened all men as he is the Son
of God? and is not the light of God sufficient in itself, to lead
to God all that follow it, yea, or nay?"

Ans. (1.) Christ as he is God, doth enlighten every man that comes
into the world, which light is conscience, or otherwise nature
itself, which doth also convince of sin (John 7:9). Yet Christ
as he is God; doth not give unto every man that spirit that doth
lead to eternal life, for all men have it not (Jude 19). (2.) Christ
as he was and is the son of God before the world was, being one
in power, and being with his Father, hath enlightened every one
that comes into the world, as aforesaid; but hath not so neither
given them his spirit. "Some are sensual," &c. (3.) Christ as
God-man, or as he came into the world to die for those whom before
as God he knew and loved; I say, he doth not in this way neither
enlighten every man with the saving light of life, or give unto them
his holy Spirit. No, they that have been, and now are believers,
do know and can remember, that all the time of their unregenerate
state, they were without Christ (Eph 2:12). so that here is no
way or room for your doctrine, take it how you will, Christ hath
not given to every one his Spirit.

Second Part of the Query. Is not the light of God sufficient in
itself, to lead to god all that follow it, yea, or nay?

Ans. (1.) As I said before, some are sensual, and have not the Spirit
of Christ. (2.) No man can come to God as a Father by adoption,
but by Jesus Christ; then it must needs be that all men, though
they do follow that light which is given to every man, it is not
able to lead to God as a Father in the Lord Jesus Christ. Ye this
light that every man hath, will shew a man there is a God, and that
this God is eternal; and also will clear out something of him, to
them, by the things that are made. But now, if this light would
lead to everlasting life, then might the devils also be delivered
from everlasting damnation; seeing they also do know god as a
creator and revenger of sin, more perfectly than any natural man
in the world, though not as a Father by adoption.

But you say, Doth it not lead to God all that follow it? Answ. (q.)
Not to be saved, though to be condemned, through the weakness and
unprofitableness of that light, or conscience, or the law, call
it either, and I clear it thus: Because, if that light that every
man receives, were able by our following it, to save us, then Christ
needed not to gave suffered, seeing all men had that light. (2.)
If that light that every man hath, which is conscience, were able
to lead a man to justification by following it; that promise was
made in vain by Jesus the Son of Mary, when he said, "I will send
you; [Mark, I will send you] the Spirit, and he shall lead you
into all truth:" for they had a light before. But it is evident,
that that was not sufficient, because they must have another sent
them by Jesus Christ, and that must be that Spirit.

Query 5. "Whether is not the same light in him that hates it, as
it is in him that loves it (John 3). If there be a difference in
the light, show it wherein; whether in the nature, or otherwise?"

Answ. (1.) That scripture quoted in John 3. "Light is come into
the world," &c., is not meant of that light, or conscience, that
every man hath; but the Man Christ Jesus is speaking there of
himself, as God-man, come into the world, born of the Virgin, if
thou compare verses 19-21 with 14-18 of the same chapter, it is
clear, for they all do speak of the same thing; namely, the Son
of Mary. And again, saith he, "I am the light of the world." Now
the man Christ, though he was then in the world, and walked up
and down in the same, yet he was not within any man in the world
as man, (though he calls himself the light thereof) though he
was in some; I say, in some, as God by his Spirit. Now the light,
which was the Man Christ, was the very same, whether loved by some,
or hated by others; but if you conclude every man hath Christ,
or that light spoken of there (John 3), within him; that I deny,
having proved the contrary. But (2.) Whether is there a difference
in the light? Answ. There are more lights than one, there is a
light that may be suspected to be darkness, where he saith, "If
the light that is in thee be darkness," &c. Again, there is the
light of the law (Prov 6:23). Again, conscience also will convince
of sin. Now there is none of these that can save a sinner from the
evil of his ways. Take the best of them, which is the righteous
law of God, that cannot. For had there been a law given, which
might have given life, then verily righteousness had come by the
law: But if you conclude that righteousness, or everlasting life
cometh by the law, you must conclude this again; that Christ
did die in vain (Gal 2:21). So then these things being not able
to save the soul, the next thing is, the Son of God, the Son of
righteousness arising with healing under his wings; he is also a
light, and indeed the saving light, for surpassing all the other
mentioned.

Now though Christ doth not differ in himself, yet there is
a difference in the power of these lights; the law and Christ,
the one not being able to save, the other being able. And again,
there is also a difference in the nature of them; the one being
a condemning light, the other a saving light. It is Moses that
accuseth you (saith Christ) even Moses in whom ye trust: But do
not think, saith Christ, that I will accuse you to the Father: No,
saith he, it is Moses, or the law given by him. But again, where
Christ speaks for himself as a Saviour, he saith "God sent not
his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world
through him might be saved" (John 3:17). So that I say, (a.) That
light spoken of (John 3), which is the Man Christ, is not in every
man that comes into the world. (b.) That the Man Christ, or the
light spoken of there, is not against himself. (c.) There is the
light of the law, conscience, and nature itself, which are in all
men, which things are altogether insufficient to save a man from
death, by his seeking of justification thereby. again, there is
Jesus Christ, he is the Saviour, but not in all men. And again,
neither is the Man Christ Jesus the condemning light.

Query 6. "Whether is it possible, that any can be saved, without
Christ manifested within? If no, then whether is not the doctrine
of salvation, which is only necessary, to preach Christ within: And
is not the whole mystery of salvation, God manifest in the flesh?"

Answ. There can none be saved, but they that have the Spirit of
Christ given unto them. But it is not the Spirit of Christ given to
the elect, that doth work out the salvation of their souls within
them, for that was obtained by the blood of the Man Christ Jesus
on the cross (Heb 9:19 compared with Heb 13:12).

Again, every one that is, or shall be saved, must, and shall have
the Spirit of Christ within them; yet doth it not follow, that to
preach Christ (only) within, is the only doctrine of salvation. For
then also the preaching of the blood of Christ shed on the cross,
as I said before, must be of non effect. But he that doth preach
the doctrine of salvation aright, must first begin to preach that
doctrine that Paul preached in 1Corinthians 15:3,4. "For I delivered
unto you (saith he) first of all that which I also received, how
that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; and that
he was buried, and that he arose again the third day according to
the scriptures." Now Christ, or the Spirit of Christ, is received
by such preaching as this is, as is clear from that scripture (Acts
10:38-44). Where Peter speaking of the word that was published
throughout all Judea: "How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth (or
which dwelt at Nazareth) with the Holy Ghost and with power: who
went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
devil; for God was with him. And we are witnesses of all things
which he did both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; (saith
Peter) whom they slew and hanged on a tree: Him God raise up the
third day, and shewed him openly; Not to all the people, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink
with him, after he rose from the dead. And he commanded us to preach
unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained
of God to be the Judge of quick and dead." And is that all? No,
But "to him give all the prophets witness, (to hem, even Jesus
of Nazareth whom the Jews crucified on the tree) that through
his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission ( or
forgiveness) of sins." Now mark. And "while Peter yet spake these
word, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word." While
Peter spake these words, that by Jesus of Nazareth forgiveness
of sins was preached to them that believe in his name, "the Holy
Ghost fell on all them that heard the word." Namely, which Peter
spake: This is the way in which the Spirit is given? namely, by
preaching a crucified Christ.

But now, no man can be saved without Christ, or the Spirit of Christ
be given to him, because he cannot be able to lay hold savingly
of, and to hope for that glory that Christ as he is God-man hath
accomplished in his own person without, unless he have the Spirit.
But farther, thou sayest; Is it not the whole mystery of salvation,
God manifested in the flesh?

Answ. Truly, to know that God out of love to poor sinners, did in
the fulness of time send forth his only begotten Son, who is equal
with his Father, to be born of a woman, and made under the law,
might receive the adoption of sons; this is to know the mystery of
godliness. Therefore, when the scriptures say, God was manifested
in the flesh, they mean, God sent forth his Son, which was and is
the word of God, God himself, and he was made flesh (John 1:14).
And so in the nature of man he did become the Lamb of God, or the
sacrifice of God, that doth take away the sins of the world (verse
29). Now here I might enlarge abundantly, but that would not be
tedious.

Query 7. "Whether is it not possible, that many may profess as much
of Christ without, as thou hast said of him, and yet be damned;
and if this be the faith to profess him born, dead, risen and
ascended without; then is there any unbeliever in England? seeing
all in the outward sound believes, and professes as much as thou
hast said. Yea, or nay?"

Answ. 1. I know there are many that do profess in word, that Christ
was born, dead, risen, and ascended without, and yet may be damned.
Yet he that doth really, with the faith of the operation of God,
believe these things, and doth also apply the virtue and merit of
the same to themselves for justification and life, shall be saved.
"If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt
believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou
shalt be saved" (Rom 10:9 And also 1Cor 15:2). "By which also ye
are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you.." What
was that? why, "how that Christ died for our sins according to
the scriptures; and that he was buried, and rose again," &c.

(2.) It is not faith, only to talk of him with the mouth, but as
I said before, to believe the same by the operation of the Spirit
in our hearts. If this be faith, (sayest thou) to profess him born,
dead, risen and ascended without, then is there any unbeliever in
England? [I reply] All that profess this do not truly believe it;
for to profess in word alone, and believe in heart, are two things.
Secondly, If to profess this were the Faith, yet for the Quakers
will not profess him ascended without, neither making intercession
without, but contrarywise strike at this doctrine.

Query 8. "Whether hath that man faith in Christ that is not changed
in the nature, and is not the liar and slanderer an unbeliever,
and of the cursed nature, yea or no?"

Answ. He that hath faith in Christ is a new creature: and the liar
and slanderer is and unbeliever: and if he live and die in that
condition, his state is very sad, though if he turn quickly, or
else look to yourselves, for you are the men, as is clear by your
discourse.

Query 9. "Whether [doth] and [man] receive Christ, who receives
him no into him? if not, show how Christ can be received, and
whether many professes him not which never received him."

Answ. Christ as he is Man, as he was a sacrifice for sin, cannot
be received really and personally into any, but yet, he that doth
indeed receive the gospel, and believe that he was a sacrifice
upon the cross for his sins, doth and hath also received his Spirit
into him, which giveth him the comfort of these things (John
14:26). And there are very many that profess him, that at the day
of judgment will fall short of eternal life, notwithstanding all
their profession; for as I said before; it is not the professor,
but the sound believer that shall be saved by him. But let the
reader mark, how thou condemnest thy own doctrine by this query,
for thou grantest many profess Christ that never receive him. How
then hath every man Christ, or the light of Christ within him? If
it be within him, either he must receive it, or snatch it by force
against the will of another, however the scripture saith, what is
it that thou hast not received; (yet all men have not received
that) (Jude 19).

Query 10. "Whether to preach for hire, for gifts and rewards, and
to divine for money, and to make merchandise of the people for
so much a year for preaching to them, be not true marks and signs
of false prophets? or can any give truer signs of false prophets
than Isaiah and Micah give, yea or nay?"

Answ. There are a company of dumb dogs that are crept into the
nation, that love give ye, and desire to bear rule by their means;
and they are every one for his gain from their quarter. there are
a company of wolves crept out also, having wrapped themselves
about with sheep's clothing, and these are both alike abominable
to the Lord. Neither can a man give a more right description of a
false prophet, than the prophets and Christ with his apostles did
give, therefore examine yourselves.

Query 11. "Whether must not the devil be chained before Christ
reign, and what is that which chains him, and whether art thou
come to one of the days of the thousand years, yea, or no?"

Answ. Christ hath two several times wherein Satan must be bound
by him, one is at the conversion of sinners, the other when he
shall come the second time, and personally appear, and reign, in
the world to come. Again, "Whether I am come to one of the days
of the thousand years?" [I reply] No, because he that doth reign
with Christ one of these days, shall live and reign with Christ
a thousand years (Rev 2:4). But there is never a believer in the
world, that doth, or in any likelihood shall live half so long,
before they die or be changed at the coming of the Man Christ
Jesus.

Query 12. "Whether dost thou know any Christ, preach or profess
any Christ who hath not lightened every man that comes into the
world with the light of life, or of condemnation; and is he not
a deceiver that exhorts people for salvation to any other thing
than the light of Christ, yea, or no? And how hath Christ lightened
every man if not within him?"

Answ. That Christ I preach, is the Christ of God, who as he
is God hath enlightened every man that comes into the world with
conscience, and the law, which is the light of condemnation, but
not of life; For the law is the ministration of condemnation (2Cor
3:7,8). And all men have the law and conscience: but these will not
save them. Again, there are some that do indeed enjoy the light of
life. And whereas thou askest, is not he a deceiver, that exhorts
people to anything else than the light of Christ? Answ. He that
telleth any man that the ministration of condemnation will save
him, which is the law, he is a liar, and a deceiver: but he that
exhorts people to lay hold on what the Man Christ Jesus hath done
in his own person for sinners, and presseth souls to venture upon
that for salvation, preacheth the truth. Christ hath given to
every one the law, and conscience within him: yet these are not
able to save him, but let him follow the righteousness of the law
never so much, yet if he be not directed of God to fly to Jesus
the son of Mary, and to what he hath done in his own person for
them he shall never be saved (Acts 4:12).

Friend, Thus have I with all plainness of speech answered thy
queries, and I fear not at all, but I have spoken the truth as it
is in Jesus. And as for committing them to the judgment of others,
as thou wouldst have me; let others say what they will, I am sure
I have spoken the truth of God; and I make no question but at the
second coming of my Lord Jesus from heaven to judge the world,
these things I shall not be ashamed of; neither am I now; but
am ready, if God shall give me life, to speak the same things to
any man, face to face; and I desire thee, and all, even as many
as shall read or hear this treatise, to consider, and look to
themselves, lest they sin against God so much in their lifetime
by rejecting these truths, that it shall never be forgiven them
to all eternity, though they repent them of their rejecting the
same. There is one thing more to which I shall speak a few words,
and that is to a few words written at the end of thy book, which
is called the postscript, wherein is several charges against myself
and some others, which I shall speak somewhat to.

The first is against John Burton, thus: John Burton said in a
discourse with some friends, that Christ had two bodies, and one
of them is out of the sight of the saints. My brother Burton being
absent, I shall answer for him concerning the charge laid against
him. And therefore, that Christ, who is and was before the world
began, God equal with his Father, did in the fulness of time take
upon him a body from the Virgin Mary, which was so prepared by
God his Father, it is evident in scripture; and in it after he had
lived a while in the world, he did hang on the cross, was taken
down thence again, and laid in Joseph's sepulchre, was raise again,
and ascended away from his disciples therewith into glory (Acts
1:3,9-11).

Again he hath another body, and that is his church (Eph 1:23). Now
that he is out of the sight of his saints in one of the bodies;
namely, that which did hang on the cross, it is also evident (1Tim
4), where Paul speaking of the very Jesus, who did bear a faithful
witness before Pontius Pilate, saith in verse 16 "Who only hath
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto;
whom no man hath seen, nor can see." That is, not with their mortal
eyes, in that glory as yet. If you say still, notwithstanding
this, that Christ as he was before the world began, hath but one
body, and that to be his church. I ask you what that was that was
taken down from the cross, and laid into Joseph's sepulchre (Luke
23:53).

The second charge is against myself, and is this; John Bunyan
said, Christ's second coming is not his coming in Spirit, for his
coming in Spirit is no coming.

The former part of the words, namely, Christ's second coming is
not his coming in the Spirit, those I own. But the Spirit is no
coming, is a lie, made of me by the Author, Edward Borrough.

The former words were spoken at a meeting in Bedford, some Quakers
being present contradicting and blaspheming: And now they could
not be content with that; but they must make up all with a lie,
and publish it in print. A Quaker there and I had some discourse
concerning Christ's second coming, and he would affirm, that his
coming in Spirit, was his second coming spoken of in scripture.
Then I asked him which was his first coming? He answered, when
he was born of the Virgin, and took flesh upon him from her. Then
said I, shall easily prove, that his coming in the Spirit is not
his second coming, for I will prove that his coming in the Spirit
was before that which the scripture and you also do call his
first coming; and proved it by that plain scripture, where Peter
speaking of the prophets, saith, "searching what, or what manner
of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them (the prophets) did
signify, when it testified before-hand the sufferings of Christ,
and the glory that should follow" (1Peter 1:11 and 3:19), where
speaking of Christ's being put to death in the flesh, but quickened
in the Spirit. "by which Spirit also he went and preached unto
the spirits (now) in prison;" but when was this, only "when once
the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah" (verse 20).
Which was long before the first coming of Christ, so called in
scripture, for that was, as I said, when he took a body from the
Virgin Mary.

But is seems clearly by these words that you do look for no other
coming but his coming in Spirit. O! how suddenly and unexpected
of you, will the Son of Man break down from heaven, with all his
mighty angels in flaming fire, and call you, together with all
nations to judgment. And though now peradventure you are ready to
slight the personal appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, that Man
to judgment, only looking for a judgment within, yet you will I
am certain, very suddenly be made to pass under another judgment,
which will be more exceeding great than any judgment you shall
have here, and more terrible. As for the latter part of the charge,
which is a very lie; though I shall not trouble myself to lay it
to your charge (you have so manifestly declared yourselves already
what you are) yet I beseech you, that hereafter you would not be
so read to receive lies from others, and publish them to the view
of the world, least you appear to all men (as you do to some) to
be such as are of an accusing lying spirit.

But farther, That Christ's coming in the Spirit is not his second
coming, it is evident; partly, in that the coming of Christ in
Spirit, was before that called in scripture, his first coming.
Secondly, he that comes the second time is he that came the first
time. Now he that came the first time was very God and very Man,
and not a Spirit only; for handle me, saith he, a Spirit hath not
flesh and bones, as you see me have (Luke 24:39). Now this same
Jesus that was very God and very Man, so born of Mary, saith, "I
go and prepare a place for you; and I (the very same as also Acts
1:10,11), will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where
I am, there ye may be also" (John 14:3). Here I might spend many
word, but it needs not; the whole current of scriptures do confirm
this thing; and therefore I shall forbear, and content myself
with this. He that will be filthy let him be filthy, for the day
is at hand.

The Third Charge is also against me, saying, "I said there was
nothing in me, nor any man to be taken notice of."

Though in some sense I do not deny these words, yet I know, and
am sure, that directly in this form of words, I did never lay them
down, but I pass that. Now in this sense I do not deny them, there
was nothing in me, as I was in my unregenerate estate; nor in any
man else in the same estate, that is worthy to be taken notice
of for justification. Because every unregenerate man is without
Christ, before he be converted (Eph 2:12). Wherefore remember,
that ye being Gentiles in the flesh (unconverted) that at that
time ye were without Christ. Now a man that is without Christ,
and hath not his Spirit in him, as some, yea, most men are (Jude
19). What is there in that man, that is worth the taking notice
of to justify him.

Also converted Paul saith, "I know that in me, (that is, in my
flesh,) dwelleth no good thing" (Rom 7:18).

As for others that are charged with things, because their names are
not also mentioned, I shall pass them by; only thus much I shall
say further to the last charge. that there is nothing in any man
by nature, before he be converted, that is worth the taking notice
of, as to seek justification thereby. And that that light which
every man hath, being at the best but conscience, nature, or the
law, let a man take notice of it, follow it, obey it never so much,
it is not able to justify the soul: For if righteousness come by
the law, then Christ is dead in vain. And as I said before, every
man hath not Christ to take notice of, though every man hath
conscience, or the light of nature in him, which is also able to
convince of sins against the law of God, yet is not able to deliver
from that curse pronounced by the Lord, against them that disobey
the law. Nay the law itself is not able to save them that do follow
it, being too weak for such a thing. And indeed god did not give
it to that end, that saints should have life by it. No (compare
Gal 2:21 with Rev 5:20), you may clearly see why God gave the law,
namely, that sins or offences might abound. But how? By discovering
sin by its workings. Now then you that follow the law, and seek
life by it, this is all you are like to have of it: You shall see
your transgression against it, made known to you by it (Rev 3:20),
and an horrible curse pronounced against you, because you cannot
give a complete continual obedience to every tittle of it.

And now friend to thee, who hast taken in hand to answer my queries
laid down in the end of my book; I say, thou hast only wrangled
and quarrelled at them; but hast not given on plain and right
answer to any one of them. Therefor I shall leave them still to
be answered by you, or others of your spirit. You will find them
at the end of the foregoing discourse: And I beseech you to answer
them in all plainness of heart, and with as moderate a spirit
as you may. It is like there may be some addition to them: But
as I have dealt plainly and sincerely with yours, so do you deal
uprightly and plainly with mine, for the satisfaction of those
who shall read them. And here I shall draw towards a conclusion,
only speak some words to those who unawares to themselves may be
carried away with the doctrines of the Quakers: And I shall be
brief in speaking to it. The way that I shall take, shall be very
plain to be understood; for I shall not lay down any doubtful
sentence in my speech to them, nor others. First, I shall shew
you that the doctrine of the Quakers is an error, and how. Second,
Who they are that are carried away with it, and why. Third, The
way Satan takes to make this delusion, or filthy doctrine to take
place in the soul.

First, That the doctrine of the Quakers is false, or an error, I
shall shew,

1. By discovering the doctrine itself. Now the doctrine of the
Quakers is plainly this; namely, that every man that comes into
the world, hath the Spirit of Christ in him. Now that his is an
error is clear, because the word of God saith plainly, that some
are "sensual, having not the Spirit" (Jude 19). And again, the
unregenerate man, in the time of his unregenerate state, is without
Christ (Eph 2:12).

2. He that will but observe the motions of that light which very
man hath within him (say they) so as to obey and close in with it
to follow it, shall undoubtedly be saved from the wrath to come.
Now this is clearly a gross error; for first, If all men have not
Christ, as they have not, then is it not an error to press men to
seek for life, by following that which is not able to give life.
Yet this they do, who labour to persuade men, yea, the souls of
men, that it is no less than the very Spirit of Christ in every
man, that doth convince of sin, when the scriptures say plainly
"the law" (Rom 3:14), "Conscience" (Rom 2:15), and nature itself
(Rom 2:14; 1Cor 11:14), will and doth convince of sin, yet none
of these is the Spirit of Christ. And the great argument that
they bring to prove that it is the Spirit of Christ, is, because
the Spirit doth also convince of sin. Now what a poor argument is
this, to say, That because the Spirit of Christ doth convince of
sin, therefore whatsoever doth convince of sin, must needs be the
Spirit of Christ. As much as to say, because the saints are called
"the light of the word" (Matt 5:14). Therefore the saints are the
Saviour of the world, seeing Christ also doth call himself the light
of the world (John 8:12), or because the moon hath, or is light,
therefore the moon is the sun. This is but sophistical arguing,
and doth beget most damnable errors and heresies in the world; but
his is the way that they take, to entangle poor souls with their
sad and erroneous doctrine, see page 22 of his book, lines 12 and
13. They say, that it must be Christ within them, that must within
them work out justification for them; when it is evident from the
whole current of scripture, that the Son of Mary was delivered
to be crucified for our offences, and his resurrection, through
faith in it, is our justification; as all along, through grace,
I have declared and cleared. And the work that the Spirit doth in
point of justification, is, to shew us what the Son of Mary hath
done an suffered in his own body on the tree, and is now doing in
the presence of his Father, in the highest heaven.

And to help us to apply this to our souls by faith now, for a
preservative against these and the like delusions, observe, (1.)
As I said before, all have not the spirit of Christ (Jude 19; Eph
2:12). (2.) That the law, with all our obedience to it, is not able
to save, or justify any poor soul (Rom 3:20). For by the works of
the law shall no flesh living be justified, though it gives the
knowledge of sin. (3.) That there is none other way to be justified
in the sight of God, but by laying hold of what the Son of Mary
(Jesus) did do and suffer in his own person, when he was in the
world. For it is by him (and what he hath done in his own person
by himself (Heb 1:3)), that any man is justified from his sins,
and the wrath of God due to the same, by believing that his blood
was shed for their sins; as it is written, "With his stripes we are
healed" (Isa 3:5), as if their own blood had been shed for their
won sins; and that his righteousness is theirs by imputation, as
if they themselves had actually fulfilled all the law of God for
their own justification (Rom 10:4).

Second, The second thing is, who are they that are carried away
with this delusion, and why?

1. Not one of God's elect whom he foreknew, shall be utterly
destroyed thereby; (I do not say they shall not be led away for a
time; but they shall not be utterly destroyed) for they are kept
by the mighty power of God through faith unto salvation. But they
are such as are not indeed the elect of god, nor chosen in Christ
before the world began. Though Hymeneus and Philetus fall away,
and overthrow the faith of some, yet "the foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his" (2Tim
2:17-19).

2. They are such as in time past, for the generality of them were
either but light, frothy professors, or else were shaken in their
principles, and unstable therein, as saith the scriptures, They
that are deceivers do beguile unstable souls. Or if they were such
as were in appearance sober and serious in the account of others,
it was wither from these convictions thy had from the law, or else
from high notions they had of the gospel; which have both such
influence at some time on the soul (though not savingly) that the
soul will go very far in obedience to them; as for example, Herod
who was an enemy to the truth, yet for a time had such heart-workings,
being convinced by the preaching of John the Baptist, that he
feared him, and observed him, and when he heard him, he did many
things, and heard hem gladly (Mark 6:20).

Now the reason why such people are carried away with such heresies
as these, or the like, is,

(1.) That as they were not of the elect of God, so God by suffering
them to be carried away finally, may make it appear, that they
were not of his elect. They went out from us, but they were not of
us: for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued
with us. But they went out from us, that it might be made manifest
(or that men might see) that they were not all of us (1John 2:19).

(2.) Because God will not have his church so disturbed always with
such as are not of the truth. Now there are some men that have
their time to walk with the church of God by permission, and these
men are ever and anon ready to broach their errors, even while they
are among the saints, to their trouble. Now God having a care of
his church, hath a time to suffer the devil to run through the
world with some erroneous doctrine or other, which when these men
taste, being spirited beforehand for that purpose, do presently
close in with the same, to the purifying of the church, and
the manifestation of themselves. And thus every branch which the
Lord's right hand hath not planted, shall and must have a time to
be rooted up (Matt 15:13).

(3.) Because others that are of the right graffing in, may
notwithstanding not presume but fear, lest they also fall through
the same example of others who are already fallen, or may fall
hereafter (Heb 4:1,2,11).

(4.) Because others may see, that it is not by their own strength
that they do stand, but freely by the grace of god, and his power
and love towards them in the Lord Jesus Christ. God hath chosen
some before the foundation of the world. Now to manifest this,
though they are even as bad as the worst by nature, yet I say,
because God will shew his power and his love, he doth preserve
some to eternal life, though others fall into eternal damnation.
Of all that thou hast given me, saith Christ, have I lost none
but the son of perdition, that the scripture might be fulfilled
(John 17:12). Many other reasons might be given why theses things
must and shall be; but I rather choose to forbear. Only this much
I have spoken, because I know it is my duty to speak a few words
unto you, that you may either close in with the truth, or else
the more clearly be left without excuse at the great day.

Third. The third and last thing, is the way that Satan takes to
make those delusions take place in the soul.

Now the way whereby he makes these or any other delusions to take
place in the soul, is, 1. to persuade the soul an enmity to any
thing or person that shall declare the contrary.

1. They are given over to believe a lie; that is, to believe false
doctrine to be the doctrine of God and of Christ. And that he might
bring this to pass, he goeth about to change the names of things;
and because the law, conscience, and nature itself can convince
of sin, therefore he calleth them Christ, or the light of Christ;
saying to a natural man, one that is not yet converted, "Mind the
light within you." If they ask what light? say they, That which
doth convince of sin. If they farther ask, why, what is that?
They say, "It is the light of Christ, the light of life, or Christ
within."

Now these things are nothing else but conscience, nature, or the
law, for a natural man hath nothing else that dwelleth within him
to convince him of sin; only these things have a new name put upon
them. And poor creatures hearing the name Christ, being ignorant
of the nature of Christ, do presently close in with these things,
supposing, nay, verily believing that these are the Spirit of
Christ. Which things being thus received, if at any time one come
and oppose them, and tell them that it is an error that they have
taken up, to think that that which is in an unregenerate man is
the Spirit of Christ, and contrarywise telleth them plainly, that
it is but their own conscience that doth convince them, or the law
written in their hearts by nature. Nay, say they, it is the light
of Christ in the conscience, when there is no scripture hath any
such manner of expressions, only a fancy of their own, taken up
without ground from the word.

2. But the soul being possessed with this doctrine, presently its
heart riseth against anything that doth contradict it, and is filled
with a secret enmity against it. Now the way that Satan takes to
bring this about, is to persuade poor souls, that all these thoughts
that do any wise contradict the principles received, is but a
temptation of the devil. And if at any time there be the doctrine
of Jesus held forth in truth, his death, burial, resurrection,
ascension, and intercession; now without in the presence of his
Father for sinners, and that there is salvation no where else but
in the merits of the firstborn Mary, which is Jesus Christ, without
the works of the law (Rom 3:28). Presently with envy they are
enraged and cry, "Dost thou not know that every man hath a measure
of the spirit given to him? Follow that, listen to that, turn thy
mind to that, and walk in the light of that." When alas, there
is no such thing as the Spirit of Christ in every man, as I said,
and proved before at large; only the devil hath gotten this way
to call conscience Christ, the law Christ; and hereby to entangle
the soul with the name of a thing, without the thing itself.

But now the soul is set down in its principles, and he that doth
any way confute that spirit, presently it falls a raging, and
cries out, serpent, liar, wolf, dragon, devil, be silent with thy
serpentine wisdom, and smoke of the bottomless pit. Now in this
the devil is wonderfully cunning; for least he should indeed
be discovered, he doth set the face hard against the truth, and
counteth it such a deadly enemy, that he will not, cannot bear it;
but lets fly against it all the hellish words and madness he can:
And now he begins first to cry, avoid Satan. All which is only to
harden him in whom he doth dwell, more and more against the truth.
Now he doth also harden souls in delusions, by presenting the ugly
and base conversations of a company of covetous wretches, who do
profess themselves to be the ministers of the gospel, but are not;
now poor creatures being shaking and doubtful what way to take,
seeing the conversation of these men to be wicked, and the doctrine
of these deluders covered with a seeming holiness; they presently
embrace it, saying, surely these men are in the right way; they
cry down the priests, whose lives we also see to be profane, they
are very strict in their ways, and if such be not good men, who
are? But yet that which is most taking is (through the corruption
and pride that is naturally in the heart of man) these men
propose such a way to salvation, as is in the compass of a man's
own ability, even works of righteousness done by him, which is
very agreeable to man's nature, which would willingly be saved,
but would not be altogether beholden to god for it: and these
works not being wrought by the priests or national ministers, but
by the other, though in opposition to the righteousness of Christ,
the Messias God-man, poor souls not only suck in these erroneous
principles, but are hardened in them against the doctrine of God
and his Son Jesus Christ, by their ungodly conversation; and thus
dishonour the Son of God. But come brethren, let us be patient,
stablish our hearts, wait but a while, and I doubt not but you
will see that those who dishonour our Jesus shall soon be brought
down, both Ranters, Quakers, priests, and people also, that shall
continue in opposing him either in doctrine or practice; for our
God hath said, "Ah! I will ease me of my adversaries."

Now, a few words more to those who do believe in Christ aright,
and lay him for their foundation.

First, Bless God that you are not carried away with the delusions
that are on foot in this generation. Secondly, See that you are
labourers after a more experimental knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ; fly more to his birth, death, blood, resurrection, ascension
and intercession: and fetch refreshing for your souls more and
more from him without, through the operation of his Spirit within;
and though the fruits of the Spirit be excellent, and to be owned
where they are found; yet have a care you take not away the glory
of the blood of Christ shed on the cross without the gates of
Jerusalem, and give it them; which you will do, if you do content
yourselves, and satisfy your consciences with this; that you find
the fruits of the Spirit within you, and do not go for peace and
consolation of conscience to the blood of Jesus shed on the cross.

Therefore learn of the saints, or rather of the Spirit (Rev 5:9).
who teacheth to sing this song, "Thou art worthy to take the
book, and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and hast
redeemed us to God by thy blood."

And as for you that cannot yet well endure to think you should
be justified by the blood of the Son of Mary shed on the cross
without the gate, I say to you, "Kiss the Son, lest he be angry,
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.
Blessed are all they that put their trust in him" (Psa 2:12).


FOOTNOTES:

1 Bunyan's epistle to "Some Gospel Truths Opened."

2 For the proof of this, read the good love of God to David, Peter,
and others, which did most woefully sin again after they were
converted.

3 Here is another of his false accusations of me.

4 See margin of the bible.--Ed.

5 There is nothing new under the sun. It appears from this that
there was a tee-total movement in the time of the commonwealth.
For the meaning of hatband, see editor's advertisement.--Ed.

6 "To famble," to falter, or stammer in speech: obsolete.--Ed. 4

***

A DISCOURSE UPON THE PHARISEE AND THE PUBLICAN

WHEREIN SEVERAL GREAT AND WEIGHTY THINGS ARE HANDLED: AS, THE
NATURE OF PRAYER, AND OF OBEDIENCE TO THE LAW, WITH HOW FAR IT
OBLIGES CHRISTIANS, AND WHEREIN IT CONSISTS.

WHEREIN IS ALSO SHEWED, THE EQUALLY DEPLORABLE CONDITION OF THE
PHARISEE, OR HYPOCRITICAL AND SELF-RIGHTEOUS MAN; AND OF THE
PUBLICAN, OR SINNER THAT LIVES IN SIN, AND IN OPEN VIOLATION OF
THE DIVINE LAWS. TOGETHER WITH THE WAY AND METHOD OF GOD'S FREE
GRACE IN PARDONING PENITENT SINNERS; PROVING THAT HE JUSTIFIES
THEM BY IMPUTING CHRIST'S RIGHTEOUSNESS TO THEM.

BY JOHN BUNYAN, AUTHOR OF THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS.



ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

This important treatise unvails, in few but telling words, the
nature of prayer, about which mankind has made most awful mistakes.
Multitudes conceive that the heart-searching God can be influenced
and propitiated by eloquent words and forms of prayer; whilst the
few, who are taught by the Holy Spirit, feel and know that the
ardent desire, the aspirations, the fervent wishes of the mind,
can alone be accepted by the Eternal; and even then only through
the merits of the Redeemer.

The first edition appeared in 1635, and it soon became a very
popular book. The use and application announced at the end do not
appear to have been published, unless the author meant one of his
later productions to answer that purpose. The twelfth edition has
no date on the title page; to it is added Bunyan's last Sermon,
and his dying sayings,--"Licensed, Sept. 10th, 1688"; but this
announcement had been probably continued from some earlier edition.
The number of cheap reprints of this little volume may account, in
some measure, for the amazing errors which crept in and deformed
the book; for with the exception of "Grace Abounding," "The
Pilgrim," and "The Holy War," few books have been so carelessly
and disgracefully printed. For more than a century Bunyan has
been represented as saying, "How did God deal with sinners before
his righteousness was actually in being." In fact, no reader can
conceive the mutilated state in which this valuable treatise has
been published, unless by actual comparison with those printed
before the author's decease. Some considerable omissions, doubtless,
arose from political causes. Bunyan died very shortly before the
glorious revolution in 1688,--and in drawing a faithful portrait
of a publican or tax gatherer, he supposed the country to be
conquered by a foreign power. "Would it not be an insufferable
thing? yea, did not that man deserve hanging ten times over, that
should, being a Dutchman, fall in with a French invader, and farm
at his hands, those cruel and grievous taxations, which he, in
barbarous wise, should at his conquest lay upon them; and exact
and force them to be paid with an over, and above of what is
appointed." He goes on to argue, that if this would be a severe
trial at the hand of a foreigner, how much more oppressive would
it appear if exercised by a fellow countryman. "If these things
are intolerable, what shall we think of such men as shall join to
all this compliance with a foreign prince, to rob the church of
God? yea, that shall become a man in power under them, to wring out
of the hand of a brother, his estate; yea, his bread and livelihood."
These paragraphs, and much more, were omitted, probably, from
a fear of giving offence to the new government, and, until the
present edition, they had not been restored. In Bunyan's time,
severe and awful persecutions fell upon the church of God in
England, and he must have felt the utmost compassion, mingled with
deep abhorrence, for those emissaries of Satan, the Informers, who
plundered mercilessly all who refused obedience to the order of
common prayer. These men, aided by fanatic justices and clergymen,
reduced many pious families to the severest sufferings, while
thousands fled to the wilds of America for that refuge among men
called savages, which was denied them by their much more savage
countrymen. It is distressing to read the narrative, published in
1670, of those proceedings in Bedford, while Bunyan was an inmate
in its jail. The porters, charged to assist in carrying off the
people's goods, ran away, saying, that "they would be hanged,
drawn, and quartered, before they would assist in that work"; two
of them were sent to gaol for thus refusing to aid in this severe
enforcement of impious laws. This populous town "was so thin of
people that it looked more like a country village than a corporation;
and the shops being generally shut down, it seemed like a place
visited with the pest, where usually is written upon the door--Lord,
have mercy upon us." When in the presence of the justice the officers
took all his goods from Thomas Arthur, he appealed to the humane
feelings of the magistrate on behalf of his children,--"Sir, shall
my children starve," to which he replied, "yes, your children shall
starve." All these bitter sufferings were inflicted for worshipping
God according to the directions of his holy word. Can we wonder
then that Bunyan uses hard words. He felt that state hierarchies
were anti-christian; their fruit declared that those who supported
them by such cruelties were aliens and enemies to the church of
Christ.

As a theological treatise, this of the Pharisee and Publican is
invaluable. It is clear and perfectly intelligible to every candid
and prayerful inquirer. When our author is proving the impossibility
of a sinner's recommending himself to the divine favour by
any imperfect good works of his own, he draws a vivid picture.
A lord invites his friends to a sumptuous banquet, the provision
is bountiful and in rich abundance, when some of the guests take
a few mouldy crusts out of their pockets and lay them on their
plates, lest the prince had not provided a sufficient repast for
his friends; "would it not be a high affront to, a great contempt
of, and a distrust in, the goodness of the Lord." We are bound
to produce good works as a fruit of faith--a proof of love to him
that hath redeemed us, but not to recommend us to his favour. The
picture of such a feast drawn by John Bunyan must make upon every
reader a deep, a lasting, an indelible impression. How bitter and
how true is the irony, when the Pharisee is represented as saying,
"I came to thy feast out of civility, but for thy dainties I need
them not, I have enough of my own; I thank thee for thy kindness,
but I am not as those that stand in need of thy provisions, nor
yet as this Publican." And how excellent is the reasoning and
the Christian philosophy of that paragraph which was suppressed
after Bunyan's death. The language is bold and striking, but
it exhibits the unvarnished truth; an inward change of nature is
the only cause of good and acceptable works--good or evil actions
are but the evidences of our state by grace or by nature--they do
not work that change or produce that state. It is a soul-humbling
view of our state of death by sin, or of life by the righteousness
and obedience of Christ. Bunyan's train of reasoning on Romans 5
is worthy of our profound consideration,--"When we were enemies we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son." What is a sinful
man in himself, or in his approach to God, but as stubble fully
dry in the presence of a consuming fire, unless he is washed and
cleansed by the atoning sacrifice of Jesus.

May the glorified spirit of Bunyan rejoice among the angels of
heaven, over souls converted by the instrumentality of this solemn
and searching treatise.

GEORGE OFFOR.


TO THE READER.

Courteous Reader,

I have made bold once again to present thee with some of my
meditations; and they are now about the PHARISEE and the PUBLICAN:
Two men in whose condition the whole world is comprehended, both
as to their state now, and condition at the judgment.

Wherefore in reading this little book thou must needs read thyself.
I do not say thou must understand thy condition; for it is the
gift of God must make thee do that. Howbeit, if God will bless it
to thee, it may be a means to bring thee to see whose steps thou
art treading, and so at whose end thou art like to arrive.

And let me beg this at thy hand, now thou art about to read; reserve
thy judgment or sentence as to me, until thou hast passed through
the discourse.

Justification is treated of here, and the way for men to be saved.

I have also O PUBLICAN here, as my skill hath served me, for thy
encouragement, set before thee the Pharisee and the Publican in
their colours, and shewed thee, that though the Publican seemed
to be far behind, yet in running he got the prize from the lofty
Pharisee. I say, Art thou a Pharisee? Here is a Pharisee for thee!
Art thou a Publican? Here is a Publican for thee!

God give thee the Publican's heart, if thou art in the Publican's
sins, that thou mayest partake with the Publican, of mercy.--So
wisheth thy friend.

JOHN BUNYAN.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN.

"TWO MEN WENT UP INTO THE TEMPLE TO PRAY; THE ONE A PHARISEE,
AND THE OTHER A PUBLICAN: THE PHARISEE STOOD AND PRAYED THUS
WITH HIMSELF, GOD, I THANK THEE, THAT I AM NOT AS OTHER MEN ARE,
EXTORTIONERS, UNJUST, ADULTERERS, OR EVEN AS THIS PUBLICAN. I FAST
TWICE IN THE WEEK, I GIVE TITHES OF ALL THAT I POSSESS. AND THE
PUBLICAN, STANDING AFAR OFF, WOULD NOT LIFT UP SO MUCH AS HIS EYES
UNTO HEAVEN, BUT SMOTE UPON HIS BREAST, SAYING, GOD BE MERCIFUL
TO ME A SINNER." LUKE 18:10-13.

In the beginning of this chapter you read of the reason of the parable
of the unjust judge and the poor widow; namely, to encourage men
to pray. He spake a parable to THIS END, that men ought always to
pray and not to faint. And a most sweet parable for that purpose
it is: For if through importunity, a poor widow-woman may prevail
with an unjust judge; and so consequently with an unmerciful and
hard-hearted tyrant; how much more shall the poor, afflicted,
distressed, and tempted people of God, prevail with, and obtain
mercy at the hands of a loving, just and merciful God? The unjust
judge would not hearken to, nor regard, the cry of the poor widow
for a while: "But afterward he said within himself, Though I fear
not God, nor regard man; yet because this widow troubleth me,
I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me."
Hark, saith Christ, "what the unjust judge saith. And shall not
God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him?" I
tell you, that he will avenge them speedily.

This is therefore a very comfortable parable to such of the saints,
that are under hard usages by reason of evil men, their might,
and tyranny. For by it we are taught to believe and expect, that
God, though for a while he seemeth not to regard, yet will, in
due time and season, arise and set such in safety from them that
puff at them. (Psa 12:5)

Let the good Christian pray always; let him pray and not faint at
seeming delays; for if the widow by importunity prevailed with the
unjust judge, how much more shall he with his heavenly Father. "I
tell you, [says Christ,] that he will avenge them speedily."

But now, forasmuch as this parable reacheth not (so directly) the
poor publican in the text, therefore our Lord begins again, and
adds to that another parable, this parable, which I have chosen
for my text. By the which he designeth two things: First, The
conviction of the proud and self-conceited Pharisee. Secondly,
The raising up and healing of the cast down and dejected Publican.
And observe it, as by the first parable he chiefly designeth the
relief of those that are under the hand of cruel tyrants: So by
this he designeth the relief of those that lie under the load and
burden of a guilty and disquieted conscience.

This therefore is a parable that is full of singular comfort to
such of the sinners in the world, that are clogged with guilt, and
a sense of sin; and that lie under the apprehensions of, and that
are driven to God by, the sense of the judgment, that for sin is
due unto them.

In my handling of this text, I shall have respect to these things.

First, To the PERSONS in the text.

Secondly, To the CONDITION of the persons in the text.

Thirdly, To the CONCLUSION that Christ makes upon them both.

First, For the PERSONS. They were, as you see, far one from another
in their own apprehension of themselves; one good, the other bad;
but yet in the judgment of the law, both alike, both the same,
both sinners; for they both stood in need of merit.1 True, the
first mentioned did not see it, as the other poor sinner did; but
that altereth not the case. He that is in the judgment of the law
a sinner, is in the judgment of the law for sin condemned, though
in his own judgment he be never so righteous.

Men must not be judged, or justified, according to what themselves
do think, but according to the verdict and sentence that cometh
out of the mouth of God about them.2 Now the sentence of God is,
"They are all under sin--There is none righteous, no, not one"(Rom
3): 'Tis no matter then what the Pharisee did think of himself,
God by his word hath proclaimed him a sinner. A sinner, by reason
of original sin. A sinner by reason of actual transgression. Personally
therefore, with reference to the true nature of their state, they
both were sinners, and both by the law under condemnation. True,
the Publican's leprosy was outward; but the Pharisee's leprosy was
inward: his heart, his soul, his spirit, was as foul, and had as
much the plague of sin, as had the other in his life or conversation.

Secondly, As to their CONDITION. I do not mean by condition, so
much a habit of mind, as the state that they had each of them
put themselves into by that mind. The one, says the text, was a
Pharisee, the other a Publican. A Pharisee: That is, one that hath
chosen to himself such a course of life. A Publican: That is, one
that hath chosen to himself such a course of life. These terms
therefore shew, the divers courses of life that they had put
themselves into. The Pharisee, as he thought, had put himself into
a condition for heaven and glory; but the Publican was for this
world, and his lusts. Wherefore when the Pharisee stands in the
temple, he boasteth of himself and good condition; but condemneth
the Publican, and bitterly inveigheth against him. But, as
I said, their personal state by the law, was not at all changed.
The Pharisee made himself never the better; the Publican also
abode in his place. Indeed the Publican is here found to recant,
and repent of his condition; of the condition that he had put
himself into; and the Pharisee to boast of his: But the Publican's
repentance was not of himself, but of God; who can also, yea,
and sometimes it is evident (Acts 9), he doth make Pharisees also
repent of that condition that they have chosen to be in themselves.
(Phil 3:3-8) The Pharisee, therefore in commending of himself,
makes himself never the better. The Publican also, in condemning
of himself, makes himself never the worse. Nay, contrariwise, the
Pharisee by commending of himself makes himself much the worse
(verse 14). And the Publican, by condemning of himself, makes
himself much the better. "I tell you, [says Christ] This man went
down to his house justified rather than the other: For every one
that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself
shall be exalted."

But, I say, as to men's commending of themselves, yea, though others
should commend them also, that availeth, to Godward, nothing at
all. "For not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom
the Lord commendeth." So then, men in "measuring themselves by
themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not
wise." (2 Cor 10:18,12)

Now this was the way of the Pharisee, I am not, saith he, as other
men; I am no extortioner, nor unjust, no adulterer, nor yet as
this Publican.

TWO MEN WENT UP INTO THE TEMPLE TO PRAY. And they two, as I said,
as opposite one to the other, as any two men that ever went thither
to pray. One of them was over righteous, and the other wicked over
much. Some would have thought, had they not by the word of Christ
been otherwise described, that they had been both of the same
religion; for they both went up into the temple to pray; yea,
both to pray, and that at the same time, as if they did it by
appointment, by agreement, but there was no such thing. The one
was a Pharisee, the other a Publican; for so saith the after words:
And therefore persons as opposite as light and darkness, as fire
and water; I mean as to their apprehensions one of another. The
Pharisee could not abide the Publican, nor could the Publican
brook the Pharisee, and yet both went up into the temple to pray.
It is strange to see, and yet it is seen, that men cross in their
minds, cross in their principles, cross in their apprehensions;
yea, and cross in their prayers too, should yet meet together in
the temple to pray.

TWO MEN, Men not of the middle sort, as afore is shewed; but two,
and them too, picked out of the best and worst that was: as shall
now be a little more largely handled. Two men, a Pharisee and a
Publican.

To be a Pharisee was in those days counted honourable for religion,
and for holiness of life. A Pharisee was a man of esteem and
repute among the Jews, though it is a term of reproach with us.
Else Paul would not as he did, and at such a time as he did it, have
said, "Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee."
(Acts 23:6, Phil 3:5) For now he stood upon his purgation and
justification, especially it appears so by the place first named.
And far be it from any to think, that Paul would make use of a
colour of wickedness, to save, thereby, himself from the fury of
the people.

A Publican was in those days counted one of the vilest of men,
as is manifest; because when they are by the word, by way of
discrimination, made mention of, they are ranked with the most
vile and base. Therefore they are joined with sinners. "He eateth
and drinketh with publicans and sinners"; and with harlots. "The
publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God." Yea, when
our Lord Christ would have the rebellious professor stigmatized
to purpose, he saith: "Let him be unto thee as an heathen man,
and a publican."

We therefore can make no judgment of men upon the outward appearance
of them. Who would have thought, but that the Pharisee had been a
good man, for he was righteous; for he prayed. And who could have
thought, that the other had been a good man? For he was a Publican:
A man, by good men, and bad men, joined with the worst of men, to
wit, with sinners, harlots, heathens.

The Pharisee was a sectarian; the Publican was an officer. The
Pharisee even because he was a sectarian, was had the more in
esteem; and the Publican because he was an officer, was had the
more in reproach. To speak a little to both these.

The Pharisee was a sectarian, one that deviated, that turned aside
in his worshipping from the way of God, both in matter and manner
of worship; for such an one I count a sectarian. That he turned
aside from the matter, which is the rule of worship, to wit, the
written word, it is evident; for Christ saith, That they rejected
the commandments of God, and made them of no effect, that they
might keep their own traditions. (Mark 7:9-14) That they turned
aside also as to their manner of worship, and became sectarians
there, is with no less authority asserted; For "all their works
they do for to be seen of men." (Acts 26:5, Matt 23:5)

Now this being none of the order or ordinance of Christ, and yet
being chose by, and stuck to of these sort of men, and also made
a singular and necessary part of worship, became a sect, or bottom
for these hypocritical factious men to adhere unto, and to make of
others, disciples to themselves. And that they might be admired,
and rendered venerable by the simple people to their fellows, they
loved to go in long robes; they loved to pray in markets, and in
the corners of the streets; they shewed great zeal for the small
things of the law, but had only great words for things that were
substantial. "They make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge
the borders of their garments." (Matt 23:5)

When I say the Pharisee was a sectarian, I do not mean that every
sectarian is a Pharisee. There was the sect of the Herodians, and
of the Alexandrians, of the Sadducees, with many others; but to
be a Pharisee, was to be of the straitest sect: After the most
straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee; that therefore
of all the sects, was the most strait and strict. Therefore,
saith he in another place, I was "taught according to the perfect
manner of the law of the fathers." (Acts 22:3, 26:4-6) And again,
"Touching the law a Pharisee." (Phil 3:5) The Pharisees therefore
did carry the bell,3 and did wear the garland for religion; for
he out-did, he went beyond all other sectarians in his day. He
was the strictest, he was the most zealous; therefore Christ in
his making of this parable, waveth all other sects then in being,
and pitcheth upon the Pharisee as the man most meet, by whose
rejection he might shew forth, and demonstrate the riches of
his mercy in its extension to sinners: "Two men went up into the
temple to pray, the one a Pharisee." The one such a brave man as
you have heard.

The PUBLICAN also went up thither to pray. The Publican, I told
you before, was an officer. An officer that served the Romans and
themselves too; for the Romans at that time were possessors of the
land of Jewry, the lot of Israel's inheritance, and the Emperor
Tiberius Caesar placed over that land four governors, to wit,
Pilate, Herod, Philip, and Lysanias (Luke 3:1); all these were
Gentiles, heathens, infidels; and the Publicans were a sort of
inferior men, to whom was let out to farm, and so men that were
employed by these to gather up the taxes and customs, that the
heathens had laid upon the Jews to be paid to the emperor. (Luke
2:1, 3:12,13)

But they were a generation of men that were very injurious in the
execution of their office. They would exact and demand more than
was due of the people; yea, and if their demands were denied, they
would falsely accuse those that so denied them to the governor,
and by false accusation obtain the money of the people, and so
wickedly enrich themselves. (Luke 3:13, 19:2,8) This was therefore
grievous to the Jews, who always counted themselves a free
people, and could never abide to be in bondage to any. And this
was something of the reason, that they were so generally, by all
the Jews, counted so vile and base, and reckoned among the worst
of men, even as our informers and bum bailiffs are with us at this
day.

But that which heightened the spirit of the people against them,
and that made them so odious and filthy in their eyes, was for
that, at least so I think, these Publicans were not, as the other
officers, aliens, heathens, and Gentiles, but men of their own
nation, Jews, and so the brethren of those that they so abused. Had
they been Gentiles, it had not been to be wondered at; that they
abused, accused and by false accusations peeled and wasted the
people; for that cannot but be expected at the hands of aliens
and strangers.

The Publican then was a Jew, a kind of a renegade Jew, that through
the love that he had to unjust gains, fell off in his affections
from his brethren, adhered to the Romans, and became a kind of
servant to them against their brethren, farming the heathenish
taxations at the hand of strangers, and exacting of them upon their
brethren with much cruelty, falsehood, and extortion. And hence,
as I said, it was, that to be a Publican, was to be so odious
a thing, so vile a sinner, and so grievous a man in the eyes of
the Jews. And would it not be an insufferable thing? Yea, did not
that man deserve hanging ten times over, that should, being a
Dutchman, fall in with a French invader, and take place or farm
at his hands, those cruel and grievous taxations, which he in
barbarous wise should at his conquest lay upon them; and exact
and force them to be paid him with an over and above of what
is appointed.4 Why this was the Publican, he was a Jew, and so
should have abode with them, and have been content to share with
his brethren in their calamities; but contrary to nature, to law,
to religion, reason, and honesty, he fell in with the heathen,
and took the advantage of their tyranny, to pole, to peel,5 to
rob and impoverish his brethren.

But for proof that the Publican was a Jew.

1. They are, even then, when compared with, yet distinguished from
the heathen; Let him be to thee as an heathen man and a Publican
(Matt 18), which two terms, I think, must not here be applied to
one and the self-same man, as if the heathen was a Publican, or
the Publican a heathen, but to men of two distinct nations; as
that Publican and Harlot, is to be understood of sinners of both
sexes. The Publican is not an harlot, for he is a man, &c. and such
a man as has been described before. So by Publicans and Sinners,
is meant Publicans, and such sinners as the Gentiles were; or
such as, by the text, the Publican is distinguished from: Where
the Pharisee saith he was not an extortioner, unjust, adulterer,
or even as this Publican. Nor can he by Heathen Man, intend
the person, and by the term Publican, the office or place of the
heathen man; but by Publican is meant the renegade Jew, in such a
place, &c. as is yet further manifest by that which follows. For,

2. Those Publicans, even every one of them that by name are made
mention of in the New Testament, have such names put upon them;
yea, and other circumstances thereunto annexed, as doth demonstrate
them to be Jews. I remember the names of no more but three, to
wit, Matthew, Levi, and Zaccheus, and they were all Jews.

(1.) Matthew was a Jew, and the same Matthew was a Publican; yea,
and also afterward an apostle. He was a Jew, and wrote his gospel
in Hebrew; He was an apostle, and is therefore found among
the twelve. That he was a Publican too, is as evident by his own
words: For though Mark and Luke in their mentioning of his name
and apostleship, do forbear to call him a Publican. (Mar 3:18,
Luke 6:15) Yet when this Matthew comes to speak of himself, he
calls himself Matthew the Publican (Matt 10:3), for I count this
the self-same Matthew that Mark and Luke maketh mention of, because
I find no other Matthew among the apostles but he: Matthew the
Publican, Matthew the man so deep in apostasy, Matthew the man
of that ill fame among his brethren. Love in Mark and Luke, when
they counted him among the apostles, did cover with silence this
his Publican state; and it is meet for Peter to call Paul his
beloved brother, when Paul himself shall call himself the chief
of sinners; but faithfulness to the world, and a desire to be
abased, that Christ thereby, and grace by him, might be advanced,
made Matthew, in his evangelical writings, call himself by the
name of Matthew the Publican. Nor has he lost thereby; for Christ
again to exalt him, as he hath also done by the apostle Paul, hath
set, by his special providence, the testimony that this Matthew
hath given of his birth, life, death, doctrine, and miracles, in
the front of all the New Testament.

(2.) The next Publican that I find by the testament of Christ,
made mention of by name, is Levi, another of the apostles of Jesus
Christ. This Levi also, by the Holy Ghost in holy writ, is called
by the name of James. Not James the brother of John, for Zebedee
was his father; but James the son of Alpheus. Now I take this
Levi also to be another than Matthew; first, because Matthew is
not called the son of Alpheus; and because Matthew and Levi, or
James the son of Alpheus, are distinctly counted where the names
of the apostles are mentioned (Matt 10:3), for two distinct persons:
And that this Levi, or James the apostle was a Publican, as was
the apostle Matthew, whom we mentioned before, is evident; for
both Mark and Luke do count him such. First, Mark saith, Christ
found him when he called him, as he also found Matthew, sitting
at the receipt of custom; yea, Luke words it thus: "He went forth,
and saw a publican, named Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom:
and he said unto him, Follow me." (Mark 2:14, Luke 5:27)

Now that this Levi, or James the son of Alpheus, was a Jew, his
name doth well make manifest. Besides, had there been among the
apostles any more Gentiles save Simon the Canaanite; or if this
Levi James had been [one] here, I think the Holy Ghost would,
to distinguish him, have included him in the same discriminating
character as he did the other, when he called him Simon the
Canaanite. (Matt 10:4)

Matthew, therefore, and Levi or James, were both Publicans, and,
as I think, called both at the same time;6 were both Publican-Jews,
and made by grace the apostles of Jesus Christ.

(3.) The next Publican that I find by name, made mention of in the
testament of Christ, is one Zaccheus. And he was a chief Publican;
yea, for ought I know, the master of them all. "There was a
man, [saith Luke,] named Zaccheus, which was the chief among the
Publicans, and he was rich." (Luke 19:2) This man, Christ saith,
was a son of Abraham, that is, as other Jews were; for he spake that
to stop the mouths of their Pharisaical cavillations. Besides, the
Publican shewed himself to be such an one, when under a supposition
of wronging any man, he has respect to the Jewish law of restoring
four-fold. (Exo 22:1, 2 Sam 12:6)

It is further manifest that he was a Jew, because Christ puts
him among the lost; to wit, among the lost sheep of the house of
Israel (Luke 19:8-10, Matt 15:24), for Zaccheus was one that might
properly be said to be lost, and that in the Jews account: Lost
I say, and that not only in the most common sense, by reason of
transgression against the law, but for that he was an apostate Jew;
not with reference to heathenish religion, but as to heathenish,
cruel, and barbarous actions; and therefore he was, as the other,
by his brethren counted as bad as heathens, Gentiles, and harlots.
But salvation is come to this house, saith Christ, and that
notwithstanding his Publican practices, forasmuch as he also is
the son of Abraham.

3. Again, Christ by the parable of the lost sheep, doth plainly
intimate, that the Publican was a Jew. "Then drew near unto him
all the Publicans and sinners for to hear him. And the Pharisees
and Scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and
eateth with them." (Luke 15:1,2)

But by what answer doth Christ repel their objections? Why, he
saith, "What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one
of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and
go after that which is lost until he find it?" Doth he not here,
by the lost sheep, mean the poor Publican? Plenty of whom, while
he preached this sermon, were there, as objects of the Pharisees'
scorn; but of the pity and compassion of Jesus Christ! he did
without doubt mean them. For, pray, what was the flock, and who
Christ's sheep under the law, but the house and people of Israel?
(Exo 34:30,31) So then, who could be the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, but such as was Matthew, James, Zaccheus, and their
companions in their, and such like transgressions.

4. Besides, had not the Publican been of the Jews, how easy had
it been for the Pharisees to have objected, that an impertinency
was couched in that most excellent parable of the lost sheep?
They might have said, We are offended, because thou receivest the
Publicans, and thou for vindication of thy practice, propoundest
a parable of lost sheep; but they are the sinners of the house
of Israel, and the Publicans are aliens and Gentiles. I say, How
easily might they thus have objected? But they knew full well,
that the parable was pertinent, for that the Publicans were of
the Jews, and not of the aliens. Yea, had they not been Jews, it
cannot, it must not be thought, that Christ, in sum, should call
them so; and yet he did do so, when he called them lost sheep.

Now that these Publicans were Jews, what follows, but that for
this they were a great deal the more abominated of their brethren.
And, as I have also hinted before, it is no marvel though they
were; for a treacherous brother is worse than an open enemy. (Psa
55:12,13) For, if to be debauched in open and common transgressions
is odious, how odious is it for a brother to be so? For a brother
in nature and religion to be so? I say again, if these things are
intolerable, what shall we think of such men, as shall join to all
this compliance with a foreign prince to rob the church of God?
Yea, that shall become a tenant, an officer, a man in power under
them, to exact, force, and wring out of the hand of a brother
his estate; yea, his bread and livelihood. Add to all this, What
shall we say to him that shall do for an enemy against a brother
in a way of injury and wrong, more than in strictness of law they
were commanded by that same enemy to do? And yet all this they
did, as both John insinuates, and Zaccheus confesses.7

The Pharisee therefore was not so good, but the Publican was as
bad: Indeed, the Publican was a notorious wretch, one that had a
way of transgressing by himself; one that could not be sufficiently
condemned by the Jews, nor coupled with a viler than himself. 'Tis
true, you find him here in the temple at prayer; not because he
retained in his apostasy, conscience of the true religion, but
God had awakened him, shewn him his sin, and bestowed upon him
the grace of repentance, by which he was not only fetched back to
the temple, and prayer, but to his God, and to the salvation of
his soul.

The Pharisee, then, was a man of another complexion, and stood as
to his own thoughts of himself; yea, and in the thoughts of others
also, upon the highest and better ground by far. The Publican was
a notorious sinner; the Pharisee was a notorious righteous man.
The Publican was a sinner out of the ordinary way of sinning; and
the Pharisee was a man for righteousness in a singular way also.
The Publican pursued his villanies, and the Pharisee pursued his
righteousness; and yet they both meet in the temple to pray. Yea,
the Pharisee stuck to, and boasted in the law of God; but the
Publican did forsake it, and hardened his heart against his way
and people.

Thus diverse were they in their appearances; the Pharisee, very
good; the Publican, very bad. But as to the law of God, which
looked upon them with reference to the state of their spirits, and
the nature of their actions, by that they were both found sinners;
the Publican an open outside one, and the Pharisee a filthy inside
one. This is evident, because the best of them was rejected, and
the worst of them was received to mercy. Mercy standeth not at
the Publican's badness, nor is it enamoured with the Pharisee's
goodness: It suffereth not the law to take place on both, though
it findeth them both in sin, but graciously embraceth the most
unworthy, and leaveth the best to shift for himself. And good
reason that both should be dealt with after this manner; to wit,
that the word of grace should be justified upon the soul of the
penitent, and that the other should stand or fall to that, which
he had chosen to be his master.

There are three things that follow upon this discourse.

[Conclusion.] 1. That the righteousness of man is not of any
esteem with God, as to Justification. It is passed by as a thing
of naughtiness, a thing not worth the taking notice of. There was
not so much as notice taken of the Pharisee's person, or prayer,
because he came into the temple mantled up in his own good things.

[Conclusion.] 2. That the man that has nothing to commend him to
God, but his own good doings, shall never be in favour with him.
This also is evident from the text: The Pharisee had his own
righteousness, but had nothing else to commend him to God; and
therefore could not by that obtain favour with God, but abode
still a rejected one, and in a state of condemnation.

[Conclusion.] 3. Wherefore, though we are bound by the law of
charity to judge of men, according as in appearance they present
themselves unto us: yet withal, to wit, though we do so judge,
we must leave room for the judgment of God. Mercy may receive him
that we have doomed to hell, and justice may take hold on him,
whom we have judged to be bound up in the bundle of life. And both
these things are apparent by the persons under consideration.

We, like Joseph, are for setting of Manasseh before Ephraim; but
God, like Jacob, puts his hands across, and lays his right hand
upon the worst man's head, and his left hand upon the best, to
the amazement and wonderment even of the best of men. (Gen 48:14)

[THE PHARISEE'S PRAYER.]

"Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and
the other a Publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself,
God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that I possess."8

In these words many things are worth the noting. As,

FIRST. THE PHARISEE'S DEFINITION OF RIGHTEOUSNESS; the which
standeth in two things: 1. In negatives. 2. In positives.

In negatives; to wit, what a man that is righteous must not be: I
am no extortioner, no unjust man, no adulterer, nor yet as this
Publican.

In positives; to wit, what a man that is righteous must be: I fast
twice a week, I give tithes of all that I possess, &c.

That righteousness standeth in negative and positive holiness
is true; but that the Pharisee's definition is, notwithstanding,
false, will be manifest by and by. But I will first treat of
righteousness in the general, because the text leadeth me to it.

First then, A Man that is righteous, must have negative holiness;
that is, he must not live in actual transgressions: He must not
be an extortioner, unjust, an adulterer, or, as the Publican was.
And this the apostle intends, when he saith, "Flee fornication
(2 Tim 2:22), flee also youthful lusts (1 Cor 6:18), flee from
idolatry" (1 Cor 10:14), and "Little children, keep yourselves
from idols." (1 John 5:21) For it is a vain thing to talk
of righteousness, and that ourselves are righteous, when every
observer shall find us in actual transgression. Yea, though a man
shall mix his want of negative holiness, with some good actions,
that will not make him a righteous man. As suppose, a man that
is a swearer, a drunkard, an adulterer, or the like, should,
notwithstanding this, be open handed to the poor, be a greater
executor of justice in his place, be exact in his buying, selling,
keep touch with his promise and with his friend, or the like. These
things, yea, many more such, cannot make him a righteous man; for
the beginning of righteousness is yet wanting in him, which is
this negative holiness: For except a man shall leave off to do
evil he cannot be a righteous man. Negative holiness is therefore
of absolute necessity to make one in one's self a righteous man.
This therefore condemns them, that count it sufficient if a man
have some actions that in themselves, and by virtue of the command
are good, to make him a righteous man, though negative holiness
is wanting. This is as saying to the wicked, Thou art righteous,
and a perverting of the right way of the Lord. Negative holiness
therefore must be in a man before he can be accounted righteous.

Second. As negative holiness is required to declare one a righteous
man; so also positive holiness must be joined therewith, or the
man is unrighteous still. For it is not what a man is not, but
what a man does, that declares him a righteous man. Suppose a man
be no thief, no liar, no unjust man; or, as the Pharisee saith, no
extortioner, no adulterer, &c., this will not make him a righteous
man. But there must be joined to these, holy and good actions,
before he can be declared a righteous man. Wherefore, as the
apostle, when he pressed the Christians to righteousness, did
put them first upon negative holiness, so he joineth thereto an
exhortation to positive holiness; knowing, that where positive
holiness is wanting, all the negative holiness in the whole world
cannot declare a man a righteous man. When therefore he had said,
"But thou, O man of God, flee these things," (sins and wickedness)
he adds, "and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love,
patience, meekness." (1 Tim 6:11) Here Timothy is exhorted
to negative holiness, when he is bid to flee sin. Here also he
is exhorted to positive holiness, when he is bid to follow after
righteousness, &c., for righteousness can neither stand in negative
nor positive holiness, as severed one from another. That man then,
and that man only, is, as to actions a righteous man, that hath
left off to do evil, and hath learnt to do well (Isa 1:16,17),
that hath cast off the works of darkness, and put on the armour
of light. Flee also youthful lusts, (said Paul,) but follow
righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the
Lord out of a pure heart. (2 Tim 2:22)

The Pharisee therefore, as to the general description of
righteousness, made his definition right; but as to his person and
personal righteousness, he made his definition wrong. I do not
mean, he defined his own righteousness wrong; but I mean, his
definition of true righteousness, which standeth in negative and
positive holiness, he made to stoop to justify his own righteousness,
and therein he played the hypocrite in his prayer: For although
it is true righteousness, that standeth in negative and positive
holiness; yet that is not true righteousness, that standeth
but in some pieces and ragged remnants of negative and positive
righteousness. If then the Pharisee would in his definition of
personal righteousness, have proved his own righteousness to be
good, he must have proved, that both his negative and positive
holiness had been universal: to wit, that he had left off to
act in any wickedness, and that he had given up himself to the
duty enjoined in every commandment. For so the righteous man is
described (Job 1:8), As it is also said of Zacharias and Elizabeth
his wife, "they were both righteous before God, walking in all
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless." (Luke 1:6)
Here the perfection, that is, the universality of their negative
holiness is implied, and the universality of their positive holiness
is expressed: They walked in all the commandments of the Lord;
but that they could not do, if they had lived in any unrighteous
thing or way. They walked in all blamelessly, that is, sincerely
with upright hearts. The Pharisee's righteousness therefore, even
by his own implied definition of righteousness, was not good, as
is manifest these two ways.

1. His negative holiness was not universal.

2. His positive holiness was rather criminal9 than moral.

1. His negative holiness was not universal. He saith indeed, he
was not an extortioner, nor unjust, no adulterer, nor yet as this
Publican: but now of these expressions apart, nor all, if put
together, do prove him to be perfect as to negative holiness; that
is, they do not prove him, should it be granted, that he was as holy
with this kind of holiness, as himself of himself had testified.
For, (1.) What though he was no extortioner, he might yet be a
covetous man. (Luke 16:14)

(2.) What though, as to dealing, he was not unjust to others, yet
he wanted honesty to do justice to his own soul. (Luke 16:15)

(3.) What, though he was free from the act of adultery, he might
yet be made guilty by an adulterous eye, against which the Pharisee
did not watch, of which the Pharisee did not take cognizance.
(Matt 5:28)

(4.) What, though he was not like the Publican, yet he was like,
yea, was a downright hypocrite; he wanted in those things wherein
he boasted himself, sincerity; but without sincerity no action can
be good, or accounted of God as righteous. The Pharisee therefore,
notwithstanding his boasts, was deficient in his righteousness,
though he would fain have shrouded it under the right definition
thereof.

2. Nor doth his positive holiness help him at all, forasmuch as
it is grounded mostly, if not altogether, in ceremonial holiness.
Nay, I will recollect myself, it was grounded partly in ceremonial,
and partly in superstitious holiness, if there be such a thing as
superstitious holiness in the world, this paying of tithes was
ceremonial, such as came in and went out with the typical priesthood.
But what is that to positive holiness, when it was but a small
pittance by the by. Had the Pharisee argued plainly and honestly;
I mean, had he so dealt with that law, by which now he sought to
be justified, he should have brought forth positive righteousness
in morals, and should have said and proved it too, that, as he
was no wicked man with reference to the act of wickedness, he was
indeed a righteous man in acts of moral virtues. He should, I say,
have proved himself a true lover of God, no superstitious one, but
a sincere worshipper of him; for this is contained in the first
table (Exo 20), and is so in sum expounded by the Lord Christ
himself. (Mark 12:30) He should also in the next place have proved
himself truly kind, compassionate, liberal, and full of love and
charity to his neighbour; for that is the sum of the second table,
as our Lord also doth expound it, saying, "Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself." (Mark 12:31)

True, he says, he did them no hurt; but did he do them good? To
do no hurt is one thing; and to do good, is another; and it is
possible for a man to do neither hurt nor good to his neighbour.
What then, Is he a righteous man because he hath done him no hurt?
No verily; unless, to his power, he hath also done him good.

It is therefore a very fallacious and deceitful arguing of the
Pharisee, thus to speak before God in his prayer: I am righteous,
because I have not hurt my neighbour, and because I have acted in
ceremonial duties. Nor will that help him at all to say, he gave
TITHES of all that he possessed. It had been more modest to say,
that he had paid them; for they, being commanded, were a due
debt; nor could they go before God for a free gift, because by the
commandment they were made a payment; but proud men and hypocrites,
love so to word it both with God and man, as at least to imply,
that they are more forward to do, than God's commandment is to
require them to do.

The second part of his positive holiness was superstitious; for
God hath appointed no such set fasts, neither more nor less, but
just twice a week: I fast twice a week. Ay, but who did command
thee to do so;10 commanded to fast when occasion required if thou
wast, but that thou shouldest have any occasion to do so as thou
doest, other than by thy being put upon it by a superstitious and
erroneous conscience, doth not, nor canst thou make to appear.
This part therefore of this positive righteousness, was positive
superstition, an abuse of God's law, and a gratification of thy
own erroneous conscience. Hitherto therefore, thou art defective
in thy so seemingly brave and glorious righteousness.

Yet this let me say in commendation of the Pharisee: In my
conscience he was better than many of our English Christians; for
many of them are so far off from being at all partakers of positive
righteousness, that all their ministers, bibles, good books, good
sermons, nor yet God's judgments, can persuade them to become so
much as negatively holy, that is, to leave off evil.

SECOND.--The second thing that I take notice of in this prayer of
the Pharisee, is, HIS MANNER OF DELIVERY, as he stood praying in
the temple. "God, I thank thee [said he] that I am not as other
men are." He seemed to be at this time, in more than an ordinary
frame, while now he stood in the presence of the divine majesty:
for a prayer made up of praise, is a prayer of the highest order,
and is most like the way of them that are now in a state beyond
prayer. Praise is the work of heaven; but we see here, that
an hypocrite may get into that vein, even while an hypocrite,
and while on earth below. Nor do I think that this prayer of his
was a premeditated stinted form, but a prayer extempore, made on
a sudden, according to what he felt, thought, or understood of
himself.

Here therefore, we may see, that even prayer, as well as other
acts of religious worship, may be performed in great hypocrisy;
although, I think, that to perform prayer in hypocrisy, is one of
the most daring sins that are committed by the sons of men. For
by prayer, above all duties, is our most direct, and immediate
personal approach into the presence of God: and as there is an
uttering of things before him, especially a giving of him thanks
for things received, or a begging, that such and such things might
be bestowed upon me. But now to do these things in hypocrisy, and
'tis easy to do them so, when we go up into the temple to pray,
must needs be intolerable wickedness, and it argueth infinite
patience in God, that he should let such as do so, arise alive
from their knees, or that he should suffer them to go away from
the place where they stand, without some token or mark of his wrath
upon them. I also observe, That this extempore prayer of the
Pharisee, was performed by himself, or in the strength of his own
natural parts; for so the text implieth, "The Pharisee," saith
the text, "stood and prayed thus with himself," with himself, or
by himself, and may signify, either that he spoke softly, or that
he made this prayer by reason of his natural parts. "I will pray
with the Spirit," said Paul. (1 Cor 14:15) The Pharisee prayed
with himself, said Christ. It is at this day wonderful common, for
men to pray extempore also. To pray by a book, by a premeditated
set form, is now out of fashion. He is counted no body now, that
cannot at any time, at a minute's warning, make a prayer of half
an hour long. I am not against extempore prayer, for I believe it
to be the best kind of praying; but yet I am jealous, that there
are a great many such prayers made, especially in pulpits and
public meetings, without the breathing of the Holy Ghost in them:
For if a Pharisee of old could do so, Why may not a Pharisee do
the same now? Wit, and reason, and notion is now screwed up to a
very great height; nor do men want words, or fancies, or pride, to
make them do this thing. Great is the formality of religion this
day, and little the power thereof. Now where there is a great form
and little power, and such there was also among the Jews, in the
time of our Saviour Jesus Christ, there men are most strangely
under the temptation to be hypocrites; for nothing doth so properly
and directly oppose hypocrisy, as the power and glory of the
things we profess. And so on the contrary, nothing is a greater
temptation to hypocrisy, than a form of knowledge of things without
the savour thereof. Nor can much of the power and savour of the
things of the gospel be seen at this day upon professors, I speak
not now of all, if their notions and conversations be compared
together. How proud, how covetous, how like the world in garb and
guise, in words and actions, are most of the great professors of
this our day! But when they come to divine worship, especially to
pray, by their words and carriages there, one would almost judge
them to be angels in heaven. But such things must be done in
hypocrisy, as also the Pharisee's were.

The Pharisee stood and prayed THUS WITH HIMSELF.

And, in that it is said, "he prayed with himself"; it may signify,
that he went in his prayer no further than his sense and reason,
feeling and carnal apprehensions went. True, Christian prayer
ofttimes leaves sense and reason, feeling, and carnal apprehensions
behind it, and it goeth forth with faith, hope, and desires to
know what at present we are ignorant of, and that unto which our
sense, feeling, reason, &c., are strangers. The apostle indeed
doth say, "I will pray with the understanding" (1 Cor 14:15), but
then it must be taken for an understanding spiritually enlightened.
I say, it must be so understood, because the natural understanding,
properly as such, receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God
when offered, and therefore cannot pray for them; for they to
such, are foolish things. (1 Cor 2:14)

Now a spiritually enlightened understanding may be officious in
prayer these ways.

1. As it has received conviction of the truth of the being of the
things that are of the Spirit of God; For to receive conviction
of the truth and being of such things, comes from the Spirit of
God, not from the law, sense, or reason. (1 Cor 2:10-12) Now the
understanding having, by the Holy Ghost, received conviction of
the truth of the being of such things, draweth out the heart to
cry in prayer to God for them. Therefore he saith, he would pray
with the understanding.

2. A spiritually enlightened understanding, hath also received
by the Holy Ghost, conviction of the excellency and glory of the
things that are of the Spirit of God, and so enflameth the heart
with more fervent desires in this duty of prayer; for there is a
supernatural excellency in the things that are of the Spirit; "But
if the ministration of death, [to which the Pharisee adhered]
written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children
of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the
glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away: How shall
not the ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious. For if the
ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration
of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that which was made
glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory
that excelleth." (2 Cor 3:7-10) And the Spirit of God sheweth, at
best, some things of that excellent glory of them to the understanding
that it enlighteneth. (Eph 1:17-19)

3. The spiritually enlightened understanding hath also thereby
received knowledge, that these excellent supernatural things of the
Spirit, are given by covenant in Christ to those that love God,
that are beloved of him. "Now we have received, [says Paul] not
the Spirit of the world, [that the Pharisee had] but the Spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God." (1 Cor 2:12) And this knowledge, that the
things of the Spirit of God are freely given to us of God, puts
yet a greater edge, more vigour, and yet further confidence into
the heart to ask for what is mine by gift, by a free gift of
God in his Son.11 But all these things the poor Pharisee was an
utter stranger to; he knew not the Spirit, nor the things of the
Spirit, and therefore must neglect faith, judgment, and the love
of God (Matt 23:23, Luke 11:42), and follow himself, and himself
only, as to his sense, feeling, reason, and carnal imagination in
prayer.

He stood and prayed thus WITH HIMSELF. He prayed thus, talking to
himself; for so also it may, I think, be understood. It is said of
the unjust judge, "he said within himself, Though I fear not God,
nor regard man," &c. (Luke 18:4) That is, he said it to himself.
So the Pharisee is said to pray with himself. God and the Pharisee
were not together, there was only the Pharisee and himself. Paul
knew not what to pray for without the Holy Ghost joined himself
with him, spake with him and helped him with groans unutterable.
But the Pharisee had no need of that, it was enough that HE and
HIMSELF were together at this work; for he thought without doubting
that he and himself together could do. How many times have I heard
ancient men, and ancient women, at it, with themselves, when
all alone in some private room, or in some solitary path; and in
their chat, they have been sometimes reasoning, sometimes chiding,
sometimes pleading, sometimes praying, and sometimes singing; but
yet all has been done by themselves when all alone: But yet so
done, as one that has not seen them, must needs have concluded,
that they were talking, singing, and praying with company, when
all that they said, they did it with themselves, and had neither
auditor nor regarder.

So the Pharisee was at it with himself, he and himself performed,
at this time, the duty of prayer. Now I observe, that usually when
men do speak to, or with themselves, they greatly strive to please
themselves: Therefore it is said, there is a man, That "flattereth
himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful."
(Psa 36:2) He flattereth himself in his own way, according as his
sense and carnal reason dictates to him; and he might do it as
well in prayer, as in any other way. Some men will so hear sermons,
and apply them that they may please themselves: And some men will
pray, but will refuse such words and thoughts in prayer as will
not please themselves.

Oh, how many men speak all that they speak in prayer, rather to
themselves, or to their auditory, than to God that dwelleth in
heaven! And this I take to be the manner, I mean something of the
manner of the Pharisee's praying. Indeed, he made mention of God,
as also others do; but he prayed with himself to himself, in his
own spirit, and to his own pleasing, as the matter of his prayer
doth manifest. For was it not pleasant to this hypocrite, think
you, to speak thus well of himself at this time? doubtless it was.
Also children and fools are of the same temper with hypocrites
as to this; they also love without ground, as the Pharisee, to
flatter themselves in their own eyes. But not he that commendeth
himself is approved.

God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican, &c.

Thus he begins his prayer; and it is, as was hinted before, a prayer
of the highest strain. For to make a prayer all of thanksgiving,
and to urge in that prayer, the cause of that thanksgiving, is the
highest manner of praying, and seems to be done in the strongest
faith, &c., in the greatest sense of things. And such was
the Pharisee's prayer, only he wanted substantial ground for his
thanksgiving; to wit, he wanted proof of that he said, "he was
not as other men were," except he had meant, as he did not, that
he was even of the worst sort of men: For even the best of men by
nature, and the worst, are all alike. "What, then? are we better
than they?" said Paul, "No, in no wise." (Rom 3:9) So then, he failed
in the ground of his thankfulness, and therefore his thankfulness
was grounded on an untruth, and so became feigned, and self-flattering,
and could not be acceptable with the God of heaven.

Besides, in this high prayer of the Pharisee, he fathered that
upon God which he could by no means own; to wit, that his being
so good as he thought himself to be, was through distinguishing
love and favour of God, "God, I thank thee, that I am not as
other men are." I thank thee, that thou hast made me better than
others. I thank thee that my condition is so good, and that I am
so far advanced above my neighbour.

THERE ARE SEVERAL THINGS FLOW FROM THIS PRAYER OF THE PHARISEE,
THAT ARE WORTH OUR OBSERVATION. As,

First, That the Pharisees and hypocrites, do not love to count
themselves sinners, when they stand before God. They choose rather
to commend themselves before him for virtuous and holy persons,
sometimes saying, and oftener thinking, that they are more
righteous than others. Yea, it seems by the word, to be natural,
hereditary, and so common for hypocrites to trust to themselves
that they are righteous, and then to condemn others; this is the
foundation upon which this very parable is built: "He spake this
parable, [saith Luke] unto certain which trusted in themselves
that they were righteous"; or that they were so, "and despised
others." (verse 9)

I say, hypocrites love not to think of their sins, when they stand
in the presence of God; but rather to muster up, and to present
him with their several good deeds, and to venture a standing or
falling by them.

Second, This carriage of the Pharisee before God informs us, that
moral virtues, and the ground of them, which is the law, if trusted
to, blinds the mind of man, that he cannot for them perceive
the way to happiness. While Moses is read, and his law, and the
righteousness thereof trusted to, the vail is upon their heart.
"For until this day, [said Paul] remaineth the same vail untaken
away in the reading of the old testament, which vail is done away
in Christ. But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is
upon their heart." (2 Cor 3:14,15) And this is the reason that so
many moral men, that are adorned with civil and moral righteousness,
are yet so ignorant of themselves, and the way of life by Christ.

The law of works, and the righteousness of the flesh, which is
the righteousness of the law, blinds their minds, shuts up their
eyes, and causeth them to miss of the righteousness that they are
so hotly in the pursuit of. Their minds were blinded, saith the
text: Whose minds? Why those that adhered to, that stood by, and
that sought righteousness of the law. Now,

The Pharisee was such an one, he rested in the law, he made his
boasts of God, and trusted to himself that he was righteous; And
all this proceeded of that blindness and ignorance that the law
had possessed his mind withal; for it is not granted to the law to
be the ministration of life and light, but to be the ministration
of death, when it speaks; and of darkness, when trusted unto,
that the Son of God might have the pre-eminence in all things:
Therefore 'tis said, "When the heart shall turn to him, the vail
shall be taken away." (2 Cor 3:16)

Third, We may see by this prayer, the strength of vain confidence;
it will embolden a man to stand in a lie before God; it will
embolden a man to trust to himself and to what he hath done; yea,
to plead his own goodness instead of God's mercy before him. For
the Pharisee was not only a man that justified himself before
men, but one that justified himself before God. And what was the
cause of his so justifying of himself before God; but that vain
confidence that he had in himself and his works, which were both
a cheat and a lie to himself. But, I say, the boldness of the
man was wonderful, for he stood to the lie that was in his right
hand, and pleaded the goodness of it before him. But, besides
these things, there are four things more that are couched in this
prayer of the Pharisee.

Fourth, By this prayer the Pharisee doth appropriate to himself
conversion, he challengeth it to himself and to his fellows. I am
not, saith he, as other men; that is, in unconversion, in a state
of sin, wrath, and death. And this must be his meaning; for the
religion of the Pharisee was not grounded upon any particular
natural privilege. I mean not singly, not only upon that, but upon
a falling in with those principles, notions, opinions, decrees,
traditions, and doctrines that they taught distinct from the true
and holy doctrines of the prophets. And they made to themselves
disciples by such doctrine, men, that they could captivate by
those principles, laws, doctrines, and traditions: And therefore
such are said to be of the sect of the Pharisees; that is, the
scholars, and disciples of them, converted to them and to their
doctrine. Oh! it is easy for souls to appropriate conversion to
themselves, that know not what conversion is. It is easy, I say,
for men to lay conversion to God, on a legal, or ceremonial, or
delusive bottom, on such a bottom that will sink under the burden
that is laid upon it; on such a bottom that will not stand when
it is brought under the touch-stone of God, nor against the rain,
wind, and floods that are ordained to put it to the trial, whether
it is true or false. The Pharisee here stands upon a supposed
conversion to God; "I am not as other men"; but both he, and his
conversion are rejected by the sequel of the parable: "That which
is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God."
(Luke 16:15) That is, that conversion, that men, as men, flatter
themselves that they have, is such. But the Pharisee will be
a converted man, he will have more to shew for heaven than his
neighbour, "I am not as other men are"; to wit, in a state of sin
and condemnation, but in a state of conversion and salvation. But
see how grievously this sect, this religion beguiled men. It made
them two-fold worse the children of hell than they were before:
And than their teachers were (Matt 23:15), that is, their doctrine
begat such blindness, such vain confidence, and groundless boldness in
their disciples, as to involve them in that conceit of conversion
that was false, and so if trusted to, damnable.

Fifth, By these words, we find the Pharisee, not only appropriating
conversion to himself, but rejoicing in that conversion: "God, I
thank thee," saith he, "that I am not as other men"; which saying
of his, gives us to see that he gloried in his conversion; he made
no doubt at all of his state, but lived in the joy of the safety
that he supposed his soul by his conversion to be in. Oh! thanks
to God, says he, I am not in the state of sin, death, and damnation,
as the unjust, and this Publican is. But a strong delusion! to
trust to the spider's web, and to think, that a few of the most
fine of the works of the flesh, would be sufficient to bear up the
soul in, at, and under the judgment of God. "There is a generation
that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their
filthiness." (Prov 30:12) This text can be so fitly applied to
none, as to the Pharisee, and to those that tread in the Pharisee's
steps, and that are swallowed up with is conceits, and with the
glory of his own righteousness.

So again, "There is a way [a way to heaven] which seemeth right
unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death," (Prov
14:12) This also is fulfilled in these kind of men; at the end of
their way is death and hell, notwithstanding their confidence in
the goodness of their state.

Again, "There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing." (Prov
13:7) What can be more plain from all these texts, than that some
men, that are out of the way think themselves in it; and that some
men think themselves clean that are yet in their filthiness; and
that think themselves rich for the next world, and yet are poor,
and miserable, and wretched, and blind, and naked.12 Thus the poor,
blind, naked, hypocritical Pharisee thought of himself, when God
threatened to abase him: Yea, he thought himself thus, and joyed
therein, when indeed he was going down to the chambers of death.

Sixth, by these words, the Pharisee seems to put the goodness of
his condition upon the goodness of God. I am not as other men are,
and I thank God for it. God, saith he, I thank thee that I am not
as other men are. He thanked God when God had done nothing for
him. He thanked God, when the way that he was in was not of Gods
prescribing, but of his own inventing. So the persecutor thanks
God that he was put into that way of roguery that the devil had
put him into, when he fell to rending and tearing of the church of
God: "Whose possessors slay them, [saith the prophet,] and hold
themselves not guilty: and they that sell them say, Blessed be the
Lord, for I am rich." (Zech 11:5) I remember that Luther used to
say, "In the name of God begins all mischief." All must be fathered
upon God: the Pharisee's conversion must be fathered upon God; the
right or rather the villany of the outrageous persecution against
God's people, must be fathered upon God. God, "I thank thee,"
and blessed be God, must be the burthen of the heretic's song. So
again, the free-willer, he will ascribe all to God; the quaker, the
ranter, the socinian, &c. will ascribe all to God. "God, I thank
thee," is in every man's mouth, and must be entailed to every
error, delusion, and damnable doctrine that is in the world: But
the name of God, and their doctrine, worship, and way, hangeth
together, much as doth it and the Pharisee's doctrine; that is to
say, nothing at all; for God hath not proposed their principles,
nor doth he own them, nor hath he commanded them, nor doth he
convey by them the least grace or mercy to them; but rather rejecteth
them, and holdeth them for his enemies, and for the destroyers of
the world.

Seventh, We come in the next place to the ground of all this; and
that is, to what the Pharisee had attained. To wit, that he was
no extortioner, no unjust man, no adulterer, nor even as this
Publican, and for that he fasted twice a week, and paid tithes of
all that he possessed. So that you see he pretendeth to a double
foundation for his salvation, a moral and a ceremonial one; but
both very lean, weak, and feeble: For the first of his foundations,
what is it more, if all be true that he saith, but a being removed
a few inches from the vilest men in their vilest actions, a very
slender matter to build my confidence for heaven upon.

And for the second part of his ground for life, what is it but
a couple of ceremonies, if so good. The first is questioned as a
thing not founded in God's law; and the second is such, as is of
the remotest sort of ceremonies, that teach and preach the Lord
Jesus. But suppose them to be the best, and his conformity to them
the thoroughest, they never were ordained to get to heaven by,
and so are become but a sandy foundation. But anything will serve
some men for a foundation and support for their souls, and to
build their hopes of heaven upon. I am not a drunkard, says one,
nor a liar, nor a swearer, nor a thief, and therefore, I thank
God, I have hopes of heaven and glory. I am not an extortioner, nor
an adulterer, nor unjust, nor yet as this Publican; and therefore
do hope I shall go to heaven. Alas! poor men! will your being
furnished with these things, save you from the thundering claps and
vehement batteries, that the wrath of God will make upon sin and
sinners in the day that shall burn like an oven? No, no, nothing
at that day can shroud a man from the hot rebukes of that vengeance,
but the very righteousness of God, which is not the righteousness
of the law, however christened, named, or garnished with all those
gew-gaws that men's heads and fancies can invent, for that is but
the righteousness of man.

[MAN'S RIGHTEOUSNESS REJECTED, AND THE IMPUTED RIGHTEOUSNESS OF
CHRIST ALONE TO BE RELIED ON FOR JUSTIFICATION.]

But, O thou blind Pharisee, since thou art so confident that thy
state is good, and thy righteousness is that that will stand, when
it shall be tried with fire (1 Cor 3:13), let me now reason with
thee of righteousness. My terror shall not make thee afraid; I am
not God, but a man as thou art, we both are formed out of the clay.

First, Prithee when didst thou begin to be righteous? Was it before
or after thou hadst been a sinner? Not afore, I dare say; but if
after, then the sins that thou pollutedst thyself withal before,
have made thee uncapable of acting legal righteousness. For sin,
where it is, pollutes, defiles, and makes vile the whole man;
therefore thou canst not by after acts of obedience make thyself
just in the sight of that God thou pretended now to stand praying
unto. Indeed, thou mayest cover thy dirt, and paint thy sepulchre;
for that acts of after obedience will do, though sin has gone
before. But Pharisee, God can see through the white of this wall,
even to the dirt that is within: God also can see through the
paint and garnish of thy beauteous sepulchre, to the dead men's
bones that are within; nor can any of thy most holy duties, nor
all, when put together, blind the eye of the all-seeing majesty
from beholding all the uncleanness of thy soul.13 (Matt 23:27)
Stand not therefore so stoutly to it, now thou art before God; sin
is with thee, and judgment and justice is before him. It becomes
thee, therefore, rather to despise and abhor this life of thy
hand, and to count all thy doings but dross and dung, and to be
content to be justified with another's righteousness instead of
thine own. This is the way to be secured. I say, blind Pharisee,
this is the way to be secured from the wrath which is to come.

There is nothing more certain than this, that as to justification
from the curse of the law, God has rejected man's righteousness,
for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof; and hath accepted
in the room of that glorious righteousness of his Son; because
indeed, that, and that only, is universal, perfect, and equal with
his justice and holiness. This is in a manner the contents of the
whole bible, and therefore must needs be most certainly true. Now
then, Mr. Pharisee, methinks, what if thou didst this, and that
while thou art at thy prayers; to wit, cast in they mind what
doth God love most, and the resolve will be at hand. The BEST
righteousness, surely the BEST righteousness; for that thy reason
will tell thee: This done, even while thou art at thy devotion,
ask thyself again, But WHO has the best righteousness? And that
resolve will be at hand also; to wit, he that in person is equal
with God; and that is his Son Jesus Christ. He that is separate
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; and that is his
Son Jesus Christ. He that did no sin, nor had any guile found in
his mouth; and there never was any such HE in all the world but
the Son of God, Jesus Christ.

Now Pharisee, when thou hast done this, then as thou art in thy
devotion, ask again, But what is this best righteousness, the
righteousness of Christ, to do? And the answer will be ready. It
is to be made by an act of the sovereign grace of God over to the
sinner, that shall dare to trust thereto for justification from
the curse of the law. He is made unto us of God, righteousness.
(1 Cor 1:30) "He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." (2 Cor
5:21) "For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every
one that believeth." (Rom 10:4)

This done, and concluded on, then turn again Pharisee, and say thus
with thyself; Is it most safe for me to trust in this righteousness
of God? This righteousness of God-man, this righteousness of Christ?
Certainly it is. Since, by the text, it is counted the best, and
that which best pleaseth God; since it is that which God hath
appointed, that sinners shall be justified withal. For in the
Lord have we righteousness if we believe: And, in the Lord we are
justified, and do glory. (Isa 45:24,25)

Nay Pharisee, suppose thine own righteousness should be as long,
as broad, as high, as deep, as perfect, as good, even every way
as good, as the righteousness of Christ. Yet since God has chosen
by Christ, to reconcile us to himself, canst thou attempt to seek
by thine own righteousness to reconcile thyself to God, and not
be guilty of attempting, at least, to confront this righteousness
of Christ before God. Yea, to dare with it, yea, to challenge by
it, acceptance of thy person contrary to God's design.

Suppose, that when the king has chosen one to be judge in the land,
and has determined that he shall be judge in all cases, and that
by his verdict every man's judgment shall stand. I say, suppose,
after this another should arise, and of his own head resolve to
do his own business himself. Now, though he should be every whit
as able as the judge of the king's appointing to do it; yea, and
suppose he should do it as justly and righteously too, yet his
making of himself a judge, would be an affront to the king, and
an act of rebellion, and so a transgression worthy of punishment.

Why Pharisee, God hath appointed, that by the righteousness of his
Son, and by that righteousness only, men shall be justified in his
sight from the curse of the law. Wherefore, take heed, and at thy
peril, whatever thy righteousness is, confront not the righteousness
of Christ therewith. I say, bring it not in, let it not plead for
thee at the bar of God, nor do thou plead for that in his court of
justice; for thou canst not do that and be innocent. If he trusts
to his righteousness, he hath sinned, says Ezekiel. Mark the text,
"When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live; if
he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his
righteousnesses shall not be remembered: but for his iniquity that
he hath committed, he shall die for it." (Chron 33:13)

Observer a few things from this text, and they are these that
follow.

First, Here is a righteous man; a man, with whom we do not hear
that the God of heaven finds fault.

Secondly, Here is a promise made to this man, that "he shall
surely live"; but on THIS condition, that he trusts not to his own
righteousness. Whence it is manifest, that the promise of life
to this righteous man, is not for the sake of his righteousness,
but for the sake of something else, to wit, the righteousness of
Christ.

1. Not for the sake of his own righteousness. This is evident, because
we are admitted, yea, commanded, to trust in the righteousness that
saveth us. The righteousness of God is unto all, and upon all that
believe; that is, trust in it, and trust to it for justification.
Now therefore, if thy righteousness, when most perfect, could save
thee, thou mightest, yea oughtest most boldly to trust therein. But
since thou art forbidden to trust to it, it is evident it cannot
save, nor is it for the sake of that, that the righteous man
is saved. (Rom 3:21, 22)

2. But for the sake of something else; to wit, for the sake of the
righteousness of Christ, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God.
"To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might
be just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus." (Rom
3:26) See also Philippians 3:7-9.

"If he trusts to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all
his righteousness shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity
that he hath committed [in trusting to his own righteousness] he
shall die for it."

Note hence further.

1. That there is more virtue in one sin to destroy, than in all thy
righteousness to save thee alive. If he trust, if he trust never
so little, if he do at all trust to his own righteousness, all his
righteousness shall be forgotten; and by, and for, and in, the sin
that he hath committed in trusting to it, he shall die.

2. Take notice also, that there are more damnable sins than those
that are against the moral law. By which of the ten commandments
is trusting to our own righteousness forbidden? Yet it is a sin.
It is a sin therefore forbidden by the gospel, and is included,
lurketh close in, yea, is the, or a root of unbelief itself;
"He that believeth not shall be damned." But he that trusteth in
his own righteousness doth not believe, neither in the truth or
sufficiency of the righteousness of Christ to save him, therefore
he shall be damned.

But how is it manifest, that he that trusteth to his own righteousness,
doth it through a doubt, or unbelief of the truth or sufficiency
of the righteousness of Christ?

I answer, Because, even because he trusteth to his own. A man will
never willingly choose to trust to the worst of helps, when he
believes there is a better as near, and to be had as soon, and that
too, upon as easy, if not more easy terms. If he that trusteth to
his own righteousness for life, did believe, that there is indeed
such a thing as the righteousness of Christ to justify; and that
this righteousness of Christ has in it ALL sufficiency to do that
blessed work, be sure he would choose that, thereon to lay, lean,
and venture his soul, that he saw was the best, and most sufficient
to save; especially when he saw also, (and see that he must, when
he sees the righteousness of Christ) to wit, that that is to be
obtained as soon, because as near, and to be had on as easy terms;
nay, upon easier than may man's own righteousness. I say, he would
sooner choose it, because of the weight of salvation, of the worth
of salvation, and of the fearful sorrow, that to eternity will
overtake him, that in this thing shall miscarry. It is for heaven,
it is to escape hell, wrath, and damnation, saith the soul; and
therefore I will, I must, I dare not but choose that, and that
only, that I believe to be the best and most sufficient help in
so great a concern, as soul-concern is. So then he that trusteth
to his own righteousness, does it of unbelief of the sufficiency
of the righteousness of Christ to save him.

Wherefore this sin of trusting to his own righteousness is
a most high and damning transgression: because it contemneth the
righteousness of Christ, which is the only righteousness that is
sufficient to save from the curse of the law. It also disalloweth
the design of heaven, and the excellency of the mystery of the wisdom
of God, in designing this way of salvation for man. What shall I
say, It also seeketh to rob God of the honour of the salvation of
man. It seeketh to take the crown from the head of Christ, and to
set it upon the hypocrite's head; therefore, no marvel, that this
one sin be of that weight, virtue and power, as to sink that man
and his righteousness into hell, that leaneth thereon, or that
trusteth unto it.

But Pharisee, I need not talk thus unto thee, for thou art not
the man that hath that righteousness, that God findeth not fault
withal; nor is it to be found, but with him that is ordained to be
the Saviour of mankind; nor is there any such one besides Jesus, who
is called Christ. Thy righteousness is a poor pittance, a serap:
nay, not so good as a serap of righteousness. Thine own confession
makes thee partial in the law; for here, in the midst of thy boasts,
thou hast not, because thou canst not say, thou hast fulfilled
all righteousness. What madness then has brought thee into the
temple, there in audacious manner to stand and vaunt before God;
saying, "God, I thank thee, I am not as other men are."

Dost thou not know, that he that breaks one, breaks all the commandments
of God; and consequently, that he that keeps not all, keeps none
at all of the commandments of God. Say I this of myself? saith
not the scriptures the same? "For whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all." (James
2:10) Be confounded then, be confounded.

Dost thou know the God with whom now thou hast to do? He is a God
that cannot, no, that cannot, as he is just, accept of an half
righteousness for a whole; nor of a lame righteousness for
a sound; nor of a sick righteousness for a well and healthy one.
(Mal 1:8) And if so, how should he then accept of that which is not
righteousness? I say, how should he accept of that which is none
at all, save an hypocritical and feigned one, for thine is only
such. And if Christ said, when you have done all, say, "We are
unprofitable," How camest thou to say before thou hadst done one
thing well, I am better, more righteous than other men?

Didst thou believe, when thou saidst it, That God knew thy heart?
Hadst thou said this to the Publican, it had been a high and rampant
expression; but to say this before God, to the face of God, when
he knew that thou wast vile, and a sinner from the womb, and from
the conception, spoils all. It was spoken to put a check to thy
arrogancy, when Christ said, "Ye are they which justify yourselves
before me; but God knoweth your hearts." (Luke 16:15)

Hast thou taken notice of this, that God judgeth the fruit by the
heart from whence it comes? "A good man out of the good treasure
of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil man
out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which
is evil." (Luke 6:45) Nor can it be otherwise concluded, but that
thou art an evil man, and so that all thy supposed good is nought
but badness. For that thou hast made it to stand in the room of
Jesus, and hast dared to commend thyself to the living God thereby:
For thou hast trusted in thy shadow of righteousness, and committed
iniquity. Thy sin hath melted away thy righteousness, and turned
it to nothing but dross; or, if you will, to the early dew, like
to which it goeth away, and so can by no means do thee good, when
thou shalt stand in need of salvation and eternal life of God.

But further, thou sayest thou art righteous, but they are but vain
words. Knowest thou not that thy zeal, which is the life of thy
righteousness, is preposterous in many things. What else means thy
madness, and the rage thereof, against men as good as thyself.
True, thy being ignorant that they are good, may save thee from
the commission of the sin that is unpardonable, but it will never
keep thee from spot in God's sight, but will make both thee and
thy righteousness culpable.

Paul, who was once as brave a Pharisee as thou canst be, calleth
much of that zeal, which he in that estate was possessed with, and
lived in the exercise of, madness; yea, exceeding madness (Acts
26:9-11, Phil 3:5,6), and of the same sort is much of thine, and
it must be so; for a lawyer, a man for the law, and that resteth
in it, must be a persecutor; yea, a persecutor of righteous men,
and that of zeal to God; because by the law is begat, through the
weakness that it meeteth with in thee, sourness, bitterness of
spirit, and anger against him that rightfully condemneth thee of
folly, for choosing to trust to thine own righteousness, when a
better is provided of God to save us. (Gal 4:28-31) Thy righteousness
therefore is deficient; yea, thy zeal for the law, and the men of
the law, has joined madness with thy moral virtues, and made thy
righteousness unrighteousness; How then canst thou be upright
before the Lord?

Further, Has not the pride of thy spirit in this hot-headed zeal
for thy Pharisaical notions, run thee upon thinking that thou art
able to do more than God hath enjoined thee, and so able to make
thyself more righteous, than God requireth thou shouldest be. What
else is the use of thy adding of laws to God's laws, precepts to
God's precepts, and traditions to God's appointments? (Mark 7:8)
Nay, hast thou not by thus doing, condemned the law of want of
perfection, and so the God that gave it, of want of wisdom, and
faithfulness to himself and thee?

Nay, I say again, hath not thy thus doing charged God with being
ignorant of knowing, what rules there needed to be imposed on
his creatures to make their obedience complete? And doth not this
apish madness of thine intimate, moreover, that if thou hadst not
stept in with the bundle of thy traditions, righteousness had been
imperfect, not through man's weakness, but through impediment in
God, or in his ministering rules of righteousness unto us.

Now, when thou hast thought on these things fairly, answer thyself in
these few questions: Is not this arrogancy? Is not this blasphemy?
Is not this to condemn God, that thou mightest be righteous? And
dost thou think, this is, indeed, the way to be righteous?

But again, what means thy preferring of thine own rules, laws,
statues, ordinances and appointments, before the rules, laws,
statutes and appointments of God? Thinkest thou this to be right?
Whither will thy zeal, thy pride, and thy folly carry thee? Is
there more reason, more equity, more holiness in thy traditions,
than in the holy, and just, and good commandments of God? (Rom
7:12) Why then, I say, dost thou reject the commandment of God,
to keep thine own tradition? Yea, Why dost thou rage, and rail,
and cry out when men keep not thy law, or the rule of thine order,
and tradition of thine elders; and yet shut thine eyes, or wink
with them, when thou thyself shalt live in the breach of the law
of God? Yea, why wilt thou condemn men, when they keep not thy
law, but study for an excuse, yea, plead for them that live in the
breach of God's (Mark 7:10-13) Will this go for righteousness in
the day of God Almighty? Nay rather, will not this, like a millstone
about thy neck, drown thee in the deeps of hell? Oh, the blindness,
the madness, the pride, and spite, that dwells in the hearts of
these pretended righteous men.

Again, What kind of righteousness of thine, is this, that standeth
in a misplacing, and so consequently in a misesteeming of God's
commands? Some thou settest too high, and some too low; as in the
text, thou hast set a ceremony above faith, above love, and above
hope in the mercy of God: When, as it is evident, the things last
mentioned, are the things of the first rate, the weightier matters.
(Matt 23:23)

Again, Thou hast preferred the gold above the temple that
sanctifieth the gold, and the gift upon the altar, above the altar
that sanctifies the gift. (Matt 23:17)

I say again, What kind of righteousness shall this be called? What
back will such a suit of apparel fit, that is set together just
cross and thwart to what it should be? Just as if the sleeves should
be sewed upon the pocket-holes, and the pockets set on where the
sleeves should stand. Nor can other righteousness proceed where
a wrong judgment precedeth it.

This misplacing of God's laws cannot, I say, but produce misshaped
and misplaced obedience. It indeed produceth a monster, an
ill-shapened thing, a mole, a mouse, a pig, all which are things
unclean, and an abomination to the Lord. For see, saith he, if
thou wilt be making, that thou make all things according to the
pattern shewed to thee in the mount. Set faith, where faith should
stand, a moral, where a moral should stand; and a ceremony, where
a ceremony should stand; for this turning of things upside down
shall be esteemed as the potter's clay: And wilt thou call this
thy righteousness; yea, wilt thou stand in this, plead for this,
and venture an eternal concern in such a piece of linsey-woolsey
as this? O fools, and blind!

But further, let us come a little closer to the point. O blind
Pharisee. Thou standest to thy righteousness, what dost thou mean?
Wouldest thou have MERCY for thy righteousness, or JUSTICE for
thy righteousness?

[FIRST MERCY.] If mercy, what mercy? Temporal things God giveth
to the unthankful and unholy; nor doth he use to SELL the world
to man for righteousness. The earth hath he GIVEN to the children
of men. But this is not the thing; thou wouldest have eternal mercy
for thy righteousness; thou wouldest have God think upon what an
holy, what a good, what a righteous man thou art, and hast been.
But Christ died not for the good and righteous, nor did he come to
call such to the banquet, that grace hath prepared for the world.
"I came not," I am not come, saith Christ, "to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance." (Mark 2:27, Rom 5) Yet this is thy
plea; Lord God, I am a righteous man, therefore grant me mercy,
and a share in thy heavenly kingdom. What else dost thou mean,
when thou sayest, "God I thank thee, that I am not as other
men are?" Why dost thou rejoice, why art thou glad that thou art
more righteous, if indeed thou art, than thy neighbour, if it is
not because thou thinkest, that thou hast got the start of, the
better of thy neighbour, with reference to mercy; and that by thy
righteousness thou hast insinuated thyself into God's affections,
and procured an interest in his eternal favour. But,

What, What hast thou done by thy righteousness? I say, What hast
thou given to God thereby? And what hath he received of thy hand?
Perhaps thou wilt say, righteousness pleaseth God: But I answer
no, not thine, with respect to justification from the curse of
the law, unless it be as perfect, as the justice it is yielded
to, and as the law that doth command it. But thine is not such
a righteousness: no, thine is speckled, thine is spotted, thine
makes thee to look like a speckled bird in his eye-sight.

Thy righteousness has added iniquity, to thy iniquity, because it
has kept thee from a belief of thy need of repentance, and because
it has emboldened thee to thrust thyself audaciously into the
presence of God, and made thee there, even before his holy eyes,
which are so pure, that they cannot look on iniquity (Hab 1:13), to
vaunt, boast, and brag of thyself, and of thy tottering, ragged,
stinking uncleanness; for all our righteousnesses are as menstruous
rags, because they flow from a thing, a heart, a man that is
unclean. But,

Again, Wouldest thou have mercy for thy righteousness? For who
wouldest thou have it; for another, or for thyself? If for another,
and it is most proper, that a righteous man should intercede for
another by his righteousness, rather than for himself, then thou
thrusteth Christ out of his place and office, and makest thyself
to be a saviour in his stead; for a mediator there is already, even
a mediator between God and man, and he is the man Christ Jesus.
There is therefore no need of thine interceding by thy righteousness
for the acceptation of any unto justification from the curse.

But dost thou plead by thy righteousness, for mercy for thyself?
Why, in so doing thou impliest,

First, That thy righteousness can prevail with God, more than can
thy sins. I say, that thy righteousness can prevail with God, to
preserve thee from death, more than thy sins can prevail with
him to condemn thee to it. And if so, what follows? but that thy
righteousness is more, and has been done in a fuller spirit than
ever were thy sins: but thus to insinuate is to insinuate a lie;
for there is no man, but while he is a sinner, sinneth with a more
full spirit, than any good man can act righteousness withal.

A sinner when he sinneth, he doth it with all his heart, and with
all his mind, and with all his soul, and with all his strength; nor
hath he in his ordinary course any thing that bindeth. But with a
good man it is not so; all, and every whit of himself, neither is,
nor can be, in every good duty that he doth. For when he would
do good evil is present with him. And again, "The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these
are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would." (Gal 5:17)

Now if a good man cannot do good things with that wholeness and
oneness of soul, with that oneness and universalness of mind, as
a wicked man doth sin with, then is his sin heavier to weigh him
down to hell, than is his righteousness to buoy him up to the
heavens.

And again, I say, if the righteousness of a good man comes short
of his sin, both in number, weight and measure, as it doth, for
a good man shrinks and quakes at the thoughts of God's entering
into judgment with him (Psa 143:2), then is his iniquity more
than his righteousness. And I say again, if the sin of one that
is truly gracious, and so of one that hath the best of principles,
is heavier and mightier to destroy him, than is his righteousness
to save him, how can it be, that the Pharisee, that is not gracious,
but a mere carnal man, somewhat reformed and painted over with a
few, lean, and lousy formalities, should with his empty, partial,
hypocritical righteousness, counterpoise his great, mighty, and
weighty sins, that have cleaved to him in every state and condition
of his, to make him odious in the sight of God?

Second. Dost thou plead by thy righteousness for mercy for thyself?
Why in so doing thou impliest, that mercy thou deservedst; and that
is next door to, or almost as much as to say, God oweth me what
I ask for.14 The best that can be put upon it, is, thou seekest
security from the direful curse of God, as it were by the works
of the law, and to be sure betwixt Christ and the law, thou wilt
drop into hell. (Rom 9:31-33) For he that seeks for mercy, as it
were, and but as it were, by the works of the law, doth not altogether
trust thereto. Nor doth he that seeks for that righteousness,
that should save him, as it were, by the works of the law, seek it
only, wholly and solely at the hands of mercy. So then, to seek
for that that should save thee, neither at the hands of the law,
nor at the hands of mercy, is, to be sure, to seek it where it is
not to be found; for there is no medium betwixt the righteousness
of the law, and the mercy of God. Thou must have it either at
the door of the law, or at the door of grace. But sayest thou, I
am for having of it at the hands of both. I will trust solely to
neither. I love to have two strings to my bow. If one of them, as
you think, can help me by itself, my reason tells me, that both
can help me better. Therefore will I be righteous, and good, and
will seek by my goodness to be commended to the mercy of God: for
surely, he that hath something of his own to ingratiate himself
into the favour of his prince withal, shall sooner obtain his mercy
and favour, than one that comes to him as stript of all good.

I answer, But there are not two ways to heaven, not two living ways;
there is one new and living way, which Christ hath consecrated for
us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh; and besides that
one, there is no more. (Heb 10:19-24) Why then dost thou talk
of two strings to thy bow? What became of him that had, and would
have, two stools to sit on? Yea, the text says plainly, that
therefore they obtained not righteousness, because they sought it
not by faith, but, as it were, by the works of the law. See here,
they are disowned by the gospel, because they sought it not by
faith; that is, by faith only. Again, the law, and the righteousness
thereof, flies from them, nor could they attain it, though they
followed after it, because they sought it not by faith.

Mercy then is to be found alone in Jesus Christ! Again, the
righteousness of the law is to be obtained only by faith of Jesus
Christ: that is, in the Son of God is the righteousness of the law
to be found; for he, by his obedience to his Father, is become the
end of the law for righteousness. And for the sake of his legal
righteousness, which is also called the righteousness of God,
because it was God in the flesh of the Lord Jesus that did accomplish
it, is mercy and grace from God extended, to whoever dependeth by
faith upon God by this Jesus his righteousness for it. And hence
it is, that we so often read, that this Jesus is the way to the
Father: That God, for Christ's sake, forgiveth us: That by the
obedience of one, many are made righteous or justified: And that
through this man, is preached to us the forgiveness of sins; and
that by him all that believe are justified from all things, from
which they could not be justified by the law of Moses.

Now, though I here do make mention of righteousness and mercy, yet
I hold there is but one way, to wit, to eternal life; which way,
as I said, is Jesus Christ; for he is the new, the only new, and
living way to the Father of mercies, for mercy to make me capable
of abiding with him in the heavens for ever and ever.

But sayest thou, I will be righteous in myself that I may have
wherewith to commend me to God, when I go to him for mercy?

I answer, But thou blind Pharisee; I tell thee thou hast
no understanding of God's design by the gospel; which is, not to
advance man's righteousness, as thou dreamest; but to advance the
righteousness of his Son, and his grace by him. Indeed, if God's
design by the gospel was to exalt and advance man's righteousness,
then that which thou hast said, would be to the purpose. For what
greater dignity can be put upon man's righteousness, than to admit
it?

I say then, for God to admit it, to be an advocate, an intercessor,
a mediator; for all these is that which prevaileth with God to
shew me mercy. But this God never thought of, much less could he
thus design by the gospel: for the text runs flat against it. Not
of works, not of works of righteousness, which we have done; not
of works, lest any man should boast, saying, Well, I may thank my
own good life for mercy. It was partly for the sake of mine own
good deeds that I obtained mercy to be in heaven and glory. Shall
this be the burden of the song of heaven? Or is this that which
is composed by that glittering heavenly host, and which we have
read of in the holy book of God! No, no, that song runs upon
other feet, standeth in far better strains, being composed of far
higher, and truly heavenly matter: For God has "predestinated us
unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according
to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved. In whom we
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according
to the riches of his grace." (Eph 1:5-7) And it is requisite,
that the song be framed accordingly; wherefore he saith, that the
heavenly song runs thus: "Thou art worthy to take the book, and
to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed
us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and nation; and hast made us unto our God kings and priests; and
we shall reign on the earth." (Rev 5:9,10)

He saith not that they have redeemed, or helped to redeem and deliver
themselves; but that the Lamb, the Lamb that was slain; the Lamb
only was he that had redeemed them. Nor, saith he, that they had
made themselves kings and priests unto God to offer any oblation,
sacrifice, or offering whatsoever; but that the same Lamb had
made them such. For they, as is insinuated by the text, were in,
among, one with, and no better, than the kindreds, tongues, nations,
and people of the earth. Better! No, in no wise, saith Paul (Rom
3:9), therefore their separation from them was of mere mercy, free
grace, good will, and distinguishing love: not for, or because
of, works of righteousness which any of them have done; no, they
were all alike. But these, because beloved, when in their blood,
according to Ezekiel 16 were separated by free grace. And as another
scripture hath it, redeemed from the earth, and from among men by
blood. (Rev 14:3,4) Wherefore deliverance from the ireful wrath
of God, must not, neither in whole, nor in part, be ascribed to
the whole law, or to all the righteousness that comes by it; but
to the Lamb of God, Jesus, the Saviour of the world; for it is He
that delivered us from the wrath to come: and that according to
God's appointment; "For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but
to obtain salvation by [or through] our Lord Jesus Christ." (1
Thess 5:9) Let every man, therefore, take heed what he doth, and
whereon he layeth the stress of his salvation, "For other foundation
can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ." (1 Cor
3:11)

But dost thou plead still as thou didst before, and wilt thou stand
thereto? Why then, thy design must overcome God, or God's design
must overcome thee. Thy design is to give thy good life, thy good
deeds, a part of the glory of thy justification from the curse.
And God's design is to throw all thy righteousness out into the
street, into the dirt, and dunghill, as to that. Thou art for
glory, and for glorying here before God; yea, thou art for sharing
in the glory of justification, when that alone belongeth to God.
And he hath said, "My glory will I not give to another." Thou wilt
not trust wholly to God's grace in Christ for justification; and
God will not take thy stinking righteousness in, as a partner in
thy acquitment from sin, death, wrath, and hell. Now the question
is, who shall prevail? God, or the Pharisee? And whose word shall
stand? His, or the Pharisee's?

Alas! The Pharisee here must needs come down, for God is greater
than all. Also, he hath said, that no flesh shall glory in his
presence; and that he will have mercy, and not sacrifice. And
again, that it is not, nor shall be, in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God that sheweth mercy. What hope, help, stay,
or relief then is there left for the merit-monger? What twig, or
straw, or twined thread is left to be a stay for his soul? This
besom will sweep away his cobweb: The house that this spider doth
so lean upon, will now be overturned, and he in it to hell fire;
for nothing less than everlasting damnation is designed by God, and
that for this fearful and unbelieving Pharisee: God will prevail
against him for ever.

Third, But wilt thou yet plead thy righteousness for mercy? Why,
in so doing, thou takest away from God the power of giving mercy.
For if it be thine as wages, it is no longer his to dispose of
all pleasure; for that which another man oweth me, is in equity
not at his, but at my disposal. Did I say, that by this thy plea,
thou takest away from God the power of giving mercy; I will add,
yea, and also of disposing of heaven and life eternal. And then, I
pray you, what is left unto God, and what can he call his own? Not
mercy; for that by thy good deeds thou hast purchased. Not heaven;
for that by thy good deeds thou hast purchased. Not eternal life;
for that by thy good deeds thou hast purchased. Thus, Pharisee,
O thou self-righteous man, hast thou set up thyself above grace,
mercy, heaven, glory; yea, above even God himself, for the purchaser
should in reason be esteemed above the purchase.

Awake man! What hast thou done? Thou hast blasphemed God, thou
hast undervalued the glory of his grace; thou hast, what in thee
lieth, opposed the glorious design of heaven! Thou hast sought to
make thy filthy rags to share in thy justification.

Now, all these are mighty sins; these have made thine iniquity
infinite. What wilt thou do? Thou hast created to thyself a world
of needless miseries. I call them needless, because thou hadst
more than enough before. Thou hast set thyself against God in a
way of contending; thou standest upon thy points and pantables:15
Thou wilt not bate God an ace, of what thy righteousness is worth,
and wilt also make it worth what thyself shalt list. Thou wilt be
thine own judge, as to the worth of thy righteousness; thou wilt
neither hear what verdict the word has passed about it, nor wilt
thou endure, that God should throw it out in the matter of thy
justification, but quarrellest with the doctrine of free grace,
or else dost wrest it out of its place to serve thy Pharisaical
designs; saying, "God, I thank thee, I am not as other men";
fathering upon thyself, yea, upon God and thyself, a stark lie;
for thou art as other men are, though not in this, yet in that;
yea, in a far worse condition than the most of men are. Nor will
it help thee any thing to attribute this thy goodness to the God
of heaven: for that is but a mere toying; the truth is, the God
that thou intendest, is nothing but thy righteousness; and the
grace that thou supposest, is nothing but thine own good and honest
intentions. So that,

Fourth, In all that thou sayest, thou dost but play the downright
hypocrite. Thou pretendest indeed to mercy, but thou intendest
nothing but merit. Thou seemest to give the glory to God; but at
the same time takest it all to thyself. Thou despisest others,
and criest up thyself, and in conclusion fatherest all upon God
by word, and upon thyself in truth. Nor is there any thing more
common among this sort of men, than to make God, his grace, and
kindness, the stalking-horse to their own praise, saying, God, I
thank thee when they trust to themselves that they are righteous,
and have not need of any repentance; when the truth is, they are
the worst sort of men in the world, because they put themselves
into such a state as God hath not put them into, and then impute
it to God, saying, God, I thank thee, that thou hast done it; for
what greater sin [is there] than to make God a liar, or than to
father that upon God which he never meant, intended, or did. And
all this under a colour to glorify God; when there is nothing
else designed, but to take all glory from him, and to wear [it] on
thine own head as a crown, and a diadem in the face of the whole
world.

A self-righteous man therefore can come to God for mercy none
otherwise than fawningly: For what need of mercy hath a righteous
man? Let him then talk of mercy, of grace, and goodness, and come
in an hundred times with him, "God, I thank thee," in his mouth, all
is but words, there is no sense, nor savour, nor relish of mercy
and favour; nor doth he in truth, from his very heart, understand
the nature of mercy, nor what is an object thereof; but when he
thanks God, he praises himself; when he pleads for mercy, he means
his own merit; and all this is manifest from what doth follow; for,
saith he, "I am not as this Publican!" Thence clearly insinuating,
that not the good, but the bad, should be rejected of the God
of heaven: That not the bad but the good; not the sinner, but
the self-righteous, are the most proper objects of God's favour.
The same thing is done by others in this our day: Favour, mercy,
grace, and "God I thank thee," is in their mouths, but their own
strength, sufficiency, free-will, and the like, they are the things
they mean, by all such high and glorious expressions.

[SECOND JUSTICE.] But, secondly, If thy plea be not for mercy, but
for justice, then to speak a little to that. Justice has measures
and rules to go by; unto which measures and rules, if thou comest
not up, justice can do thee no good. Come then, O thou blind
Pharisee, let us pass away a few minutes in some discourse about
this. Thou demandest justice, because God hath said, that the man
that doth these things shall live in and by them. And again, the
doers of the law shall be justified; not in a way of mercy, but in
a way of justice. He shall live by them. But what hast thou done,
O blind Pharisee! What hast thou done, that thou art emboldened
to venture, to stand and fall to the most perfect justice of God?
Hast thou fulfilled the whole law, and not offended in one point?
Hast thou purged thyself from the pollutions and motions of sin
that dwell in the flesh, and work in thy own members? Is the very
being of sin rooted out of thy tabernacle? And art thou now as
perfectly innocent as ever was Jesus Christ? Hast thou, by suffering
the uttermost punishment that justice could justly lay upon thee
for thy sins, made fair and full satisfaction to God, according to
the tenor of his law for thy transgressions? If thou hast done
all these things, then thou mayest plead something, and yet but
something for thyself in a way of justice. Nay, in this I will assert
nothing, but rather inquire:--What hast thou gained by all this
thy righteousness? (we will now suppose what must not be granted)
Was not this thy state when thou wast in thy first parents? Wast
thou not innocent, perfectly innocent and righteous? And if thou
shouldest be so now, what hast thou gained thereby? Suppose that
the man, that had forty years ago forty pounds of his own, and
had spent it all since, should yet be able now to show his forty
pounds again? What has he got thereby, or how much richer is he
at last, than he was, when he first set up for himself. Nay, doth
not the blot of his ill living betwixt his first and his last,
lie as a blemish upon him, unless he should redeem himself also
by works of supererogation, from the scandal that justice may lay
at his door for that?

But, I say, suppose, O Pharisee, this should be thy case, yet God
is not bound to give thee in justice that eternal life, which by
his grace he bestoweth upon those, that have redemption from sin,
by the blood of his Son. In justice therefore, when all comes to
all, thou canst require no more than an endless life in an earthly
paradise; for there thou wast set up at first; nor doth it appear
from what hath been said, touching all that thou hast done or canst
do, that thou deservedst a better place.

Did I say, that thou mayest require justly an endless life in an
earthly paradise. Why? I must add to that saying, this proviso:
If thou continuest in the law, and in the righteousness thereof,
else not. But how dost thou know that thou shalt continue therein?
Thou hast no promise from God's mouth for that, nor is grace or
strength ministered to mankind by the covenant that thou art under.
So that still thou standest bound to thy good behaviour, and in
the day that thou dost give the first, though never so little a
trip, or stumble in thy obedience, thou forfeitest thine interest
in paradise, and in justice, as to any benefit there.

But alas, what need is there that we should thus talk of things,
when it is manifest, that thou hast sinned, not only before thou
wast a Pharisee, but when, after the most strictest sect of thy
religion, thou livedst also a Pharisee; yea, and now in the temple,
in thy prayer there, thou showest thyself to be full of ignorance,
pride, self-conceit, and horrible arrogancy, and desire of vain-glory,
&c., which are none of them the seat of fruits of righteousness,
but the seat of the devil, and the fruit of his dwelling, even at
this time, in thy heart.

Could it ever have been imagined, that such audacious impudence
could have put itself forth in any mortal man, in his approach unto
God by prayer, as has showed itself in thee? "I am not as other
men!" sayest thou; but is this the way to go to God in prayer? Is
this the way for a mortal man, that is full of sin, that stands in
need of mercy, and that must certainly perish without it, to come
to God in prayer? The prayer of the upright is God's delight. But
the upright man glorifies God's justice, by confessing to God the
vileness and pollution of his state and condition: He glorifies God's
mercy by acknowledging, that that, and that only, as communicated
of God by Christ to sinners, can save and deliver from the curse
of the law.

This, I say, is the sum of the prayer of the just and upright man
(Job 1:8, 40:4, Acts 13:22, Psa 38, 51, 2 Sam 6:21,22), and not as
thou most vain-gloriously vauntest, with thy, "God, I thank thee,
that I am not as other men are."

True, when a man is accused by his neighbours, by a brother, by
an enemy, and the like; if he be clear, and he may be so, as to
what they shall lay to his charge, then let him vindicate, justify,
and acquit himself, to the utmost that in justice and truth he
can; for his name, the preservation whereof is more to be chosen
than silver and gold; also his profession, yea, the name of God
too, and religion, may now lie at stake, by reason of such false
accusations, and perhaps can by no means, as to this man, be
recovered, and vindicated from reproach and scandal, but by his
justifying of himself. Wherefore in such a work, a man serveth
God, and saves religion from hurt; yea, as he that is a professor,
and has his profession attended with a scandalous life, hurteth
religion thereby: So he that has his profession attended with a good
life, and shall suffer it notwithstanding, to lie under blame by
false accusations, when it is in the power of his hand to justify
himself, hurteth religion also. But the case of the Pharisee is
otherwise. He is not here a dealing with men, but God; not seeking
to stand clear in the sight of the world, but in the sight of heaven
itself; and that too, not with respect to what men or angels, but
with respect to what God and his law, could charge him with and
justly lay at his door.

This therefore mainly altereth the case; for a man here to stand
thus upon his points, it is death; for he affronteth God, he
giveth him the lie, he reproveth the law, and in sum, accuseth it
of bearing false witness against him; he doth this, I say, even
by saying, "God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are";
for God hath made none of this difference. The law condemneth
all men as sinners, and testifieth, that every imagination of the
thought of the heart of the sons of men is only evil, and that
continually. Wherefore they that do as the Pharisee did, to wit,
seek to justify themselves before God from the curse of the law,
by their own good doings, though they also, as the Pharisee did,
seem to give God the thanks for all, yet do most horribly sin, even
by their so doing, and shall receive a Pharisee's reward at last.
Wherefore, O thou Pharisee, it is a vain thing for thee either to
think of, or to ask for, at God's hand, either mercy or justice.
Because mercy thou canst not ask for, from sense of want of mercy,
because thy righteousness, which is by the law, hath utterly
blinded thine eyes, and complimenting with God doth nothing. And
as for justice, that can do thee no good, but the more just God
is, and the more by that he acteth towards thee, the more miserable
and fearful will be thy condition, because of the deficiency of
thy, so much by thee, esteemed righteousness.

[The Pharisee seeth no need of mercy, but thinketh himself righteous
before God.]

What a deplorable condition then is a poor Pharisee in! For mercy
he cannot pray, he cannot pray for it with all his heart; for he
seeth, indeed, no need thereof. True, the Pharisee, though he was
impudent enough, yet would not take all from God; he would still
count, that there was due to him a tribute of thanks: "God, I
thank thee," saith he, but yet not a bit of this, for mercy; but
for that he had let him live, for I know not for what he did thank
himself, till he had made himself better than other men; but that
betterment was a betterment in none other judgment than that of
his own, and that was none other but such an one as was false.
So then, the Pharisee is by this time quite out of doors; his
righteousness is worth nothing, his prayer is worth nothing, his
thanks to God are worth nothing; for that what he had was scanty,
and imperfect, and it was his pride that made him offer it to
God for acceptance; nor could his fawning thanksgiving better his
case, or make his matter at all good before God.

But I'll warrant you, the Pharisee was so far off from thinking thus
of himself, and of his righteousness, that he thought of nothing
so much as of this, that he was a happy man; yea, happier by far
than other his fellow rationals. Yea, he plainly declares it when
he saith, "God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are."

O what a fool's paradise was the heart of the Pharisee now in,
while he stood in the temple praying to God! "God, I thank thee,"
said he, for I am good and holy, I am a righteous man; I have been
full of good works; I am no extortioner, unjust, nor adulterer,
no nor yet as this wretched Publican. I have kept myself strictly
to the rule of mine order, and my order is the most strict of all
orders now in being: I fast, I pray, I give tithes of all that I
possess. Yea, so forward am I to be a religious man; so ready
have I been to listen after my duty, that I have asked both of God
and man the ordinances of judgment and justice; I take delight in
approaching to God. What less now can be mine than the heavenly
kingdom and glory?

Now the Pharisee, like Haman, saith in his heart, To whom would
the king delight to do honour, more than to myself? Where is the
man that so pleaseth God, and consequently, that in equity and
reason should be beloved of God like me? Thus like the prodigal's
brother, he pleadeth, saying, "Lo, these many years do I serve
thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment." (Luke
15:29) O brave Pharisee! But go on in thine oration: "Nor yet as
this Publican."

Poor wretch, quoth the Pharisee to the Publican, What comest thou
for? Dost think that such a sinner as thou art shall be heard of
God? God heareth not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper of
God as I am, as I thank God I am, him he heareth. Thou, for thy
part, hast been a rebel all thy days: I abhor to come nigh thee,
or to touch thy garments. Stand by thyself, come not near me, for
I am more holy than thou. (Isa 65:5)

Hold, stop there, go no further; fie Pharisee, fie; Dost thou know
before whom thou standest, to whom thou speakest, and of what the
matter of thy silly oration is made? Thou art now before God, thou
speakest now to God, and therefore in justice and honesty thou
shouldest make mention of his righteousness, not of thine; of his
righteousness, and of his only.

I am sure Abraham, of whom thou sayest he is thy father, never had
the face to do as thou hast done, though it is to be presumed he
had more cause so to do, than thou hast, or canst have. Abraham
had whereof to glory, but not before God; yea, he was called God's
friend, and yet would not glory before him; but humbled himself,
was afraid, and trembled in himself, when he stood before him,
acknowledging of himself to be but dust and ashes. (Gen 18:27,30,
Rom 4:2) But thou, as thou hadst quite forgot, that thou wast
framed of that matter, and after the manner of other men, standest
and pleadest thy goodness before him. Be ashamed Pharisee! Dost
thou think, that God hath eyes of flesh, or that he seeth as man
sees? Is not the secrets of thy heart open unto him? Thinkest thou
with thyself, that thou, with a few of thy defiled ways canst cover
thy rotten wall, that thou hast daubed with untempered mortar,
and so hide the dirt thereof from his eyes: Or that these fine,
smooth, and oily words, that come out of thy mouth, will make him
forget that thy throat is an open sepulchre, and that thou within
art full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness? Thy thus cleansing
of the outside of the cup and platter, and thy garnishing of the
sepulchres of the righteous, is nothing at all in God's eyes,
but things that manifest, that thou art an hypocrite, and blind,
because thou takest no notice of that which is within, which yet is
that, which is most abominable to God. For the fruit, alas, what
is the fruit to the tree, or what are the streams to the fountain!
Thy fountain is defiled; yea, a defiler, and so that which maketh
thy whole self, with thy works unclean in God's sight. But Pharisee,
how comes it to pass, that the poor Publican is now such a mote
in thine eye, that thou canst not forbear, but must accuse him
before the judgment of God: for in that thou sayest, "that thou
art not even as this Publican," thou bringest in an accusation,
a charge, a bill against him. What has he done? Has he concealed
any of thy righteousness, or has he secretly informed against
thee that thou art an hypocrite, and superstitious? I dare say,
the poor wretch has neither meddled nor made16 with thee in these
matters.

But what aileth the Pharisee? Doth the poor Publican stand to vex
thee? Doth he touch thee with is dirty garments; or doth he annoy
thee with his stinking breath? Doth his posture of standing so
like a man condemned offend thee? True, he now standeth with his
hand held up at God's bar, he pleads guilty to all that is laid
to his charge.

He cannot strut, vapour, and swagger as thou dost? but why offended at
this? Oh but he has been a naughty man! and I have been righteous,
sayest thou. Well, Pharisee, well, his naughtiness shall not
be laid to thy charge, if thou hast chosen none of his ways. But
since thou wilt yet bear me down, that thou art righteous, shew
now, even now, while thou standest before God with the Publican,
some, though they be but small, yea, though but very small fruits
of thy righteousness. Let the Publican alone, since he is speaking
of his life before God. Or if thou canst not let him alone, yet
do not speak against him; for thy so doing will but prove, that
thou rememberest the evil that the man has done unto thee; yea,
and that thou bearest him a grudge for it too, and that while you
stand before God.

But Pharisee, the righteous man is a merciful man, and while he
standeth praying, he forgiveth; yea, and also crieth to God that
he will forgive him too. (Mark 11:25,26, Acts 7:60) Hitherto then
thou hast shewed none of the fruits of thy righteousness. Pharisee,
righteousness would teach thee to love this Publican, but thou
showest that thou hatest him. Love covereth the multitude of sins;
but hatred and unfaithfulness revealeth secrets.

Pharisee, thou shouldest have remembered this thy brother in this
his day of adversity, and shouldest have shewed, that thou hadst
compassion to thy brother in this his deplorable condition; but
thou, like the proud, the cruel, and arrogant man, hast taken thy
neighbour at the advantage, and that when he is even between the
straits, and standing upon the very pinnacle of difficulty, betwixt
the heavens and the hells, and hast done what thou couldest, what
on thy part lay, to thrust him down to the deep, saying, "I am
not even as this Publican."

What cruelty can be greater; what rage more furious; and what spite
and hatred more damnable and implacable, than to follow, or take
a man while he is asking of mercy at God's hands, and to put in a
caveat17 against his obtaining of it, by exclaiming against him
that he is a sinner? The master of righteousness doth not so:
"Do not think," saith he, "that I will accuse you to the Father."
(John 5:45) The scholars of righteousness do not so. "But as for
me," said David, "when they [mine enemies] were sick, [and the
Publican here was sick of the most malignant disease] my clothing
was sackcloth, I humbled my soul with fasting; and my prayer [to
wit, that I made for them] returned into mine own bosom. I behaved
myself as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down
heavily, as one that mourneth for his mother." (Psa 35:13,14)

Pharisee, Dost thou see here how contrary thou art to righteous
men? Now then, where shall we find out one to parallel thee, but
by finding out of him that is called the dragon; for he it is that
accuseth poor sinners before God. (Zech 3, Rev 12)

"I am not as this Publican": Modesty should have commanded thee
to have bit thy tongue as to this. What could the angels think,
but that revenge was now in thine heart, and but that thou comest
up into the temple, rather to boast of thyself and accuse thy
neighbour, than to pray to the God of heaven: For what one petition
is there in all thy prayer, that gives the least intimation, that
thou hast the knowledge of God or thyself? Nay, what petition
of any kind is there in thy vain-glorious oration from first to
last? only an accusation drawn up, and that against one helpless
and forlorn; against a poor man, because he is a sinner; drawn up,
I say, against him by thee, who canst not make proof of thyself
that thou art righteous: But come to proofs of righteousness, and
there thou art wanting also. What though thy raiment is better
than his, thy skin may be full as black: Yea, what if thy skin
be whiter than his, thy heart may be yet far blacker. Yea, it is
so, for the truth hath spoken it; for within you are full of excess
and all uncleanness. (Matt 23)

Pharisee, there are transgressions against the second table, and
the Publican shall be guilty of them: But there are sins also
against the first table, and thou thyself art guilty of them.

The Publican, in that he was an extortioner, unjust, and
an adulterer, made it thereby manifest that he did not love his
neighbour; and thou by making a God, a Saviour, a deliverer, of
thy filthy righteousness, doth make it appear, that thou dost not
love thy God; for as he that taketh, or that derogateth from his
neighbour in that which is his neighbour's due, sinneth against
his neighbour, so he that taketh or derogateth from God, sinneth
against God.

Now then, though thou hast not, as thou dost imagine, played at
that low game as to derogate from thy neighbour; yet thou hast
played at that high game as to derogate from thy God; for thou
hast robbed God of the glory of salvation; yea, declared, that as
to that there is no trust to be put in him. "Lo, this is the man
that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance of his
riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness" or substance.
(Psa 52:7)

What else means this great bundle of thy own righteousness, which
thou hast brought with thee into the temple? yea, what means else
thy commending of thyself because of that, and so thy implicit
prayer, that thou for that mightest find acceptance with God?

All this, what does it argue, I say, but thy diffidence of God?
and that thou countest salvation safer in thine own righteousness,
than in the righteousness of God; and that thy own love to, and
care of thy own soul, is far greater, and so much better, than
is the care and love of God. And is this to keep the first table;
yea, the first branch of that table, which saith, "Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God?" For thy thus doing cannot stand with love to
God.

How can that man say, I love God, who from his very heart shrinketh
from trusting in him? Or, how can that man say, I would glorify
God, who in his very heart refuseth to stand and fall by his mercy?

Suppose a great man should bid all the poor of the parish to his
house to dinner, and should moreover send by the mouth of his
servant, saying, My lord hath killed his fatlings, hath furnished
his table, and prepared his wine, nor is there want of anything,
come to the banquet: Would it not be counted as a high affront to,
great contempt of, and much distrust in the goodness of the man
of the house, if some of these guests should take with them, out
of their own poor store, some of their mouldy crusts, and carry
them with them, lay them on their trenchers upon the table before
the lord of the feast, and the rest of his guests, out of fear that
he yet would not provide sufficiently for those he had bidden to
his dinner that he made?

Why Pharisee, this is thy very case, Thou hast been called to a
banquet, even to the banquet of God's grace, and thou hast been
disposed to go; but behold, thou hath not believed, that he would
of his own cost make thee a feast, when thou comest; wherefore
of thy own store thou hast brought with thee, and hast laid upon
thy trencher 18 on his table, thy mouldy and hoary crusts in the
presence of the angels, and of this poor Publican; yea, and hast
vauntingly said upon the whole, "God, I thank thee, that I am not
as other men are." I am no such NEEDY man. (Luke 15:7) "I am no
extortioner, nor unjust, no adulterer, nor even as this Publican."
I am come indeed to thy feast, for of civility I could do no less;
but for thy dainties, I need them not, I have of such things
enough of mine own.19 (Luke 18:9) I thank thee therefore for
thy offer of kindness, but I am not as those that have, and stand
in need thereof, "nor yet as this Publican." And thus feeding
upon thine own fare, or by making a composition of his and thine
together, thou condemnest God, thou countest him insufficient or
unfaithful; that is, either one that hath not enough, or having
it, will not bestow it upon the poor and needy, and therefore,
of mere pretence thou goest to his banquet, but yet trustest to
thine own, and to that only.

This is to break the first table; and so to make thyself a sinner
of the highest form: for the sins against the first table, are
sins of an higher nature than are the sins against the second.
True, the sins of the second table are also sins against God,
because they are sins against the commandments of God: but the
sins that are against the first table, are sins not only against
the command, but against the very love, strength, holiness, and
faithfulness of God. And herein stands thy condition; thou hast
not, thou sayest thou hast not done injury to thy neighbour; but
what of that, IF THOU HAST REPROACHED GOD THY MAKER? This is, as
if a man should be in with his fellow-servant, and out with his
master.

Pharisee, I will assure thee, thou art besides the saddle;20 thy
state is not good, thy righteousness is so far off from doing of
thee any good, that it maketh thee to be a greater sinner than
if thou hadst none at all, because it fighteth more immediately
against the mercy, the love, the grace, and goodness of God, than
the sins of other sinners, as to degree, does.

And as they are more odious and abominable in the sight of God,
as they needs must, if what is said be true, as it is; so they are
more dangerous to the life and soul of man: for that they always
appear unto him in whom they dwell, and to him that trusteth in
them, not to be sins and transgressions, but virtues and excellent
things. Not things that set a man further off, but the things,
that bring a man nearer to God, than those that want them are or
can be. This therefore is the dangerous estate of those that go
about to establish their own righteousness, that neither have, nor
can, while they are so doing, submit themselves to the righteousness
of God. (Rom 10:3) It is far more easy to persuade a poor wretch,
whose life is debauched, and whose sins are written in his
forehead, to submit to the righteousness of God, that is, to the
righteousness that is of God's providing and giving; than it is to
persuade a self-righteous man to do it. For the profane are sooner
convinced, as of the necessity of righteousness to save him: so
that he has none of his own to do him that pleasure, and therefore
most gladly he accepteth of, and submitteth himself to the help
and health and salvation that is in the righteousness and obedience
of another man.

And upon this account it is, that Christ saith, "The Publicans and
the Harlots" enter into the kingdom of heaven before the Scribes
and Pharisees. (Matt 21:31) Poor Pharisee, what a loss art thou
at? thou art not only a sinner, but a sinner of the highest form.
Not a sinner by such sins (by such sins chiefly) as the second
table doth make manifest; but a sinner chiefly in that way, as no
self-righteous man did ever dream of. For when the righteous man
or Pharisee shall hear that he is a sinner, he replieth, "I am
not as other men are."

And because the common and more ordinary description of sin, is
the transgression against the second table, he presently replieth
again, I am not as this Publican is; and so shrowdeth himself
under his own lame endeavours, and ragged, partial patches of
moral or civil righteousness. Wherefore when he heareth, that his
righteousness is condemned, slighted, and accounted nothing worth,
then he fretteth, and fumeth, and chafeth and would kill the man,
that so slighteth and disdaineth his goodly righteousness; but
Christ and the true gospel-teacher still goeth on, and condemneth
all his righteousness to be as menstruous rags, an abomination to
God, and nothing but loss and dung.

Now menstruous rags, things that are an abomination, and dung, are
not fit matter to make a garment of to wear, when I come to God
for life, much less to be made my friend, my advocate, my mediator
and spokesman, when I stand betwixt heaven and hell, to plead for
me that I might be saved. (Isa 64:6, Luke 16:15, Phil 3:6-8)

Perhaps some will blame me, and count me also worthy thereof,
because I do not distinguish betwixt the matter and the manner of
the Pharisee's righteousness. And let them condemn me still; for,
saving the holy law, which is neither the matter nor manner of the
Pharisee's righteousness, but rather the rules, if he will live
thereby, up to which he should completely come in every thing
that he doth. And I say again, that the whole of the Pharisee's
righteousness is sinful, though not with and to me, yet with and
before the God of heaven. Sinful I say it is, and abominable, both
in itself, and also in its effects.

[The Pharisee's whole righteousness sinful.]

First, In itself; for that it is imperfect, scanty, and short of
the rule by which righteousness is enjoined, and EVEN with which
every act should be: For shortness here, even every shortness in
these duties, is sin, and sinful weakness; wherefore the curse
taketh hold of the man for coming short, but that it could not
justly do, if he coming short was not his sin: Cursed is every one
that doeth not, and that continueth not to do all things written
in the law. (Deu 27:26, Gal 3:10)

Second, It is sinful, because it is wrought by sinful flesh; for
all legal righteousness is a work of the flesh. (Rom 4:1, Phil
3:3-8)

A work, I say, of the flesh; even of that flesh, who, or which
also committeth the greatest enormities. For the flesh is but one,
though its workings are divers: Sometimes in a way most notoriously
sensual and devilish, causing the soul to wallow in wickedness as
the sow doth to wallow in the mire.

But these are not all the works of the flesh; the flesh sometimes
will attempt to be righteous, and set upon doing actions, that in
their perfection would be very glorious and beautiful to behold.
But because the law is only commanding words, and yieldeth no help
to the man that attempts to perform it; and because the flesh is
weak, and cannot do of itself that which it beginneth to meddle
with, therefore this most glorious work of the flesh faileth.

But, I say, as it is a work of the flesh, it cannot be good,
forasmuch as the hand that worketh it, is defiled with sin: For
in a good man, one spiritually good, "that is in his flesh there
dwells no good thing," but consequently that which is bad; how
then can the flesh of a carnal, graceless man, and such a one is
every Pharisee and self-righteous man in the world, produce, though
it joineth itself to the law, to the righteous law of God, that
which is good in his sight.

If any shall think that I pinch so hardly, because I call man's
righteousness which is of the law, of the righteous law of God,
flesh; let them consider that which follows; to wit, That though
man by sin, is said to be dead in sin and trespasses, yet not so
dead, but that he can act still in his own sphere. That is, to do,
and choose to do, either that which by all men is counted base,
or that which by some is counted good, though he is not, nor can
all the world make him capable of doing anything that may please
his God.

Man by nature, as dead as he is, can, and that with the will of
his flesh, will his own salvation. Man by nature can, and that by
the power of the flesh, pursue and follow after his own salvation;
but then he wills it, and pursues or follows after it, not in
God's way, but his own. Not by faith in Christ, but by the law of
Moses, see Romans 10:16, 31, 10:3-7.

Wherefore it is no error to say, that a man naturally has Will,
and a Power to pursue his will, and that as to his salvation. But
it is a damnable error to say, that he hath will and power to
pursue it, and that in God's way. For then we must hold that the
mysteries of the gospel are natural; for that natural men, or men
by nature, may apprehend and know them; yea, and know them to be
the only means by which they must obtain eternal life: for the
understanding must act before the will; yea, a man must approve
of the way to life by Jesus Christ, before his mind will budge,
or stir, or move that way: "But the natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God; [of the gospel] for they are foolishness
unto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually
discerned." (1 Cor 2:14)

He receiveth not these things; that is, his mind and will lie
cross unto them, for he counts them foolishness; nor can all the
natural wisdom in the world, cause that his will should fall in
with them, because it cannot discern them.

Nature discerneth the law, and the righteousness thereof; yea, it
discerneth it, and approveth thereof; that is, that the righteousness
of it is the best and only way to life, and therefore the natural
will and power of the flesh, as here you see in the Pharisee, do
steer their course by that for eternal life. (1 Cor 2:14)

The righteousness of the law therefore is a work of the flesh,
a work of sinful flesh, and therefore must needs be as filth and
dung, and abominable as to that for which this man hath produced
it, and presented it in the temple before God.

Nor is the Pharisee alone entangled in this mischief; many souls are
by these works of the flesh flattered, as also the Pharisee was,
into an opinion, that their state is good, when there is nothing
in it. the most that their conversion amounteth to, is, the Publican
is become a Pharisee; the open sinner is become a self-righteous
man. Of the black side of the flesh he hath had enough, now therefore
with the white side of the flesh he will recreate himself. And
now, most wicked must he needs be, that questioneth the goodness
of the state of such a man. He, of a drunkard, a swearer, an
unclean person, a sabbath-breaker, a liar, and the like, is become
reformed; a lover of righteousness, a strict observer, doer, and
trader in the formalities of the law, and a herder with men of
his complexion. And now he is become a great exclaimer against
sin and sinners, defying to acquaint with those that once were
his companions, saying, "I am not even as this Publican."

To turn therefore from the flesh to the flesh, from sin to man's
righteousness: yea, to rejoice in confidence, that thy state is
better than is that of the Publican: I mean, better in the eyes of
divine justice, and in the judgment of the law; and yet to be found
by the law, not in the spirit, but in the flesh; not in Christ,
but under the law; not in a state of salvation, but of damnation,
is common among men: For they, and they only, are the right men,
"which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus,
and have no confidence in the flesh." Where by flesh, must not be
meant the horrible transgressions against the law, though they are
also called the works of the flesh (Gal 5:19), for they minister
no occasion unto men, to have confidence in them towards God: but
that is that, which is insinuated by Paul, where he saith, he had
"no confidence in the flesh," though he might have had it, as he
said, "Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any
other man," saith he, "thinketh that he hath whereof he might
trust in the flesh, I more" (Phil 3:3,4): And then he repeats a
two-fold privilege that he had by the flesh. First, That he was
one of the seed of Abraham, and of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew
of the Hebrews, &c.

Secondly, That he had fallen in with the strictest men of that
religion, which was such after the flesh; to wit, to be a Pharisee,
and was the son of a Pharisee, had much fleshly zeal for God, and
was "touching the righteousness which is in the law blameless."
(Phil 3:6)

But, I say still, there is nothing but flesh, flesh; fleshly
privileges, and fleshly righteousness, and so consequently a fleshly
confidence, and trust for heaven. This is manifest for these very
things, when the man had his eyes enlightened, he counted all but
loss and dung, that he might be found in Christ, not having his
own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.

[Godly men are afraid of their own righteousness.]

And this leads me to another thing, and that is, to tell thee, O
thou blind Pharisee that thou canst not be in a safe condition,
because thou hast thy confidence in the flesh, that is, in the
righteousness of the flesh. For "all flesh is grass, and all the
goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field": and the flesh
and the glory of that being as weak as the grass, which today is,
and tomorrow is cast into the oven, is but a weak business for a
man to venture his eternal salvation upon. Wherefore, as I also
hinted before, the godly-wise have been afraid to be found in their
righteousness, I mean their own personal righteousness, though
that is far better, than can be the righteousness of any carnal
man: for the godly man's righteousness is wrought in the spirit and
faith of Christ; but the ungodly man's righteousness is of the
flesh, and of the law. Yet I say, this godly man is afraid to stand
by his righteousness before the tribunal of God, as is manifest
in these following particulars.

First, He sees sin in his righteousness, for so the prophet intimates,
when he saith, "All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags" (Isa
64:6): but there is nothing can make one's righteousness filthy
but sin. It is not the poor, the low, the mean, the sickly,
the beggarly state of a man, nor yet his being hated of devils,
persecuted of men, broken under necessities, reproaches, distresses,
or any kind of troubles of this nature, that can make the godly
man's righteousness filthy; nothing but SIN can do it, and that
can, doth, hath, and will do it. Nor can any man, be he who he
will, and though he watches, prays, strives, denies himself, and
puts his body under what chastisement or hardships he can; yea,
though he also shall get his spirit and soul hoisted up to the
highest peg, or pin of sanctity, and holy contemplation, and so
his lusts to the greatest degree of mortification; but sin will
be with him in the best of his performances. With him, I say,
to pollute and defile his duties, and to make his righteousness
specked and spotted, filthy and menstruous.

I will give you two or three instances for this. 1. Nehemiah was
a man, in his day, one that was zealous, very zealous for God, for
his house, for his people, and for his ways; and so continued,
and that from first to last, as they may see that please to read
the relation of his action; yet when he comes seriously to be
concerned with God about his duties, he relinquisheth a standing
by them. True, he mentioneth them to God, but confesseth that there
is imperfections in them, and prayeth that God will not wipe them
away: "Wipe not out my good deeds, O my God, that I have done
for the house of my God, and for the offices thereof." And again,
"Remember me, O my God, concerning this," also another good deed,
"and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy:--Remember
me, O my God, for good." (Neh 13)

I do not think that by these prayers he pleadeth for an acceptation
of his person, as touching justification from the curse of the
law, as the poor blind Pharisee doth; but that God would accept
of his service, as he was a son, and not deny to give him a reward
of grace for what he had done, since he was pleased to declare
in his testament, that he would reward the labour of love of his
saints with an exceeding weight of glory; and therefore prayeth,
that God would not wipe away his good deeds, but remember him for
good, according to the greatness of his mercy.

2. A second instance is that of David, where he saith, "Enter not
into judgment with thy servant": O Lord; "for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified." (Psa 143:2) David, as I also have hinted
before is said to be a man after God's own heart (Acts 13:22),
and as here by the Spirit he acknowledges him for his servant;
yet behold how he shrinketh, how he draweth back, how he prayeth,
and petitioneth, that God would vouchsafe so much as not to enter
into judgment with him. Lord, saith he, if thou enterest into
judgment with me, I die, because I shall be condemned; for in thy
sight I cannot be justified; to wit, by my own good deeds. Lord,
at the beginning of thy dealing with me, by thy law and my works
I die, therefore do not so much as enter into judgment with me,
O Lord. Nor is this my case only, but it is the condition of all
the world: "For in thy sight shall NO man living be justified."

3. A third instance is, that general conclusion of the apostle,
"But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God,
it is evident: for, The just shall live by faith." (Gal 3:11) By
this saying of Paul, as he taketh up the sentence of the prophet
Habakkuk (2:4), so he taketh up this sentence, yea, and the personal
justice of David also. No man, saith he, is justified by the law
in the sight of God; no, no just man, no holy man, not the strictest
and most righteous man. But why not? why? Because the just shall
live by faith.

The just man, therefore, must die, if he has not faith in another
righteousness, than that which is of the law; called his own:
I say, he must die, if he has none other righteousness than that
which is his own by the law.21 Thus also Paul confesses of himself:
I, saith he, know nothing by myself, either before conversion or
after; that is, I knew not, that I did anything before conversion,
either against the law, or against my conscience; for I was then,
touching the righteousness which is of the law, blameless. Also,
since my conversion, I know nothing by myself; for "I have lived
in all good conscience before God unto this day." (Acts 23:1)

A great saying, I promise you. I doubt this is more than our
glorious justitiaries can say, except they say and lie. Well, but
yet, "I am not hereby justified." (1 Cor 4:4, Phil 3:7) Nor will
I dare to venture the eternal salvation of my soul upon mine own
justice, "but he that judgeth me is the Lord." That is, though
I, through my dimsightedness, cannot see the imperfections of my
righteousness; yet the Lord, who is my judge, and before whose
tribunal I must shortly stand, can and will; and if in his sight
there shall be found no more but one spot in my righteousness, I
must, if I plead my righteousness, fall for that.

Second, That the best of men are afraid to stand before God's tribunal,
there to be judged by the law as to life and death, according
to the sufficiency or non-sufficiency of their righteousness, is
evident, because by casting away their own, in this matter, they
make all the means they can for this; that is, that his mercy,
by an act of grace, be made over to them, and that they in it may
stand before God to be judged.

Hence David cries out so often, "Lead me, O Lord, in thy
righteousness." (Psa 5:8) "Deliver me in thy righteousness." (Psa
31:1) "Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness."
(Psa 35:24) "Quicken me in thy righteousness." (Psa 119:40) "O
Lord," says he, "give ear to my supplications; in thy faithfulness
answer me, and in thy righteousness. And enter not into judgment
with thy servant": O Lord: "For in thy sight shall no man living
be justified." (Psa 143:1,2) And David, What if God doth thus?
Why then, saith he, "My tongue shall speak of thy righteousness."
(Psa 35:28) "My tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness."
(Psa 51:14) "My mouth shall shew forth thy righteousness." Yea,
"I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only."
(Psa 71:15,16)

Daniel also, when he comes to plead for himself and his people, he
first casts away his and their righteousness, saying, "For we do
not present out supplications before thee for our righteousnesses."
And pleads God's righteousness, and that he might have a share and
interest in that, saying, "O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto
thee" (9:7,18), to wit, that righteousness, for the sake of which,
mercy and forgiveness, and so heaven and happiness is extended to
us.

Righteousness belongeth to thee, and is thine, as nearly as sin, shame,
and confusion, is ours, and belongeth to us, which righteousness
he afterwards calleth "The Lord," saying, do it, for the Lord's
sake; read the 16, 17, verses of the ninth of Daniel. "O Lord,"
saith he, "according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let
thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem,
thy holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities
of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to
all that are about us. Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer
of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to
shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake."
For the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ; for on him Daniel now had
his eye, and through him to the Father he made his supplication;
yea, and the answer was according to his prayer, to wit, that God
would have mercy on Jerusalem, and that he would in his time send
the Lord, the Messias, to bring them in everlasting righteousness
for them.

Paul also, as I have hinted before, disclaims his own righteousness,
and layeth fast hold on the righteousness of God: seeking to be found
in that, or in him that has it, not having his own righteousness;
for he knew that when the rain descends, the winds blow, and
the floods come down falls on all men, but they that have that
righteousness. (Phil 3)

Now the earnest desire of the righteous to be found in God's
righteousness, ariseth from strong conviction of the imperfections
of their own, and of good knowledge that was given them of the
terror that will attend men at the day of the fiery trial; to wit,
the day of judgment. For although men can now flatter themselves
into a fool's paradise, and persuade themselves that all shall
be well with them then, for the sake of their own silly and
vain-glorious performances; yet when the day comes that shall
burn like an oven, and when all that have done wickedly shall be
as stubble, and so will all appear to be that are not found in
Christ, then will their righteousness vanish like smoke, or be
like fuel for that burning flame. And hence the righteousness that
the godly seek to be found in, is called the name of the Lord, a
strong tower, a rock, a shield, a fortress, a buckler, a rock of
defence, UNTO which they resort, and INTO which they run and are
safe.

The godly wise therefore do not, as this Pharisee, bring their own
righteousness into the temple, and there buoy up themselves and
spirits by that into a conceit, that for the sake of that, God
will be merciful and good unto them: but throwing away their own,
they make to God for his, because they certainly know, even by
the word of God, that in the judgment none can stand the trial,
but those that are found in the righteousness of God.

Third, That the best of men are afraid to stand before God's
tribunal by the law, there to be judged to life and death, according
to the sufficiency or non-sufficiency of their righteousness, is
evident: for they know, that it is a vain thing to seek by acts
of righteousness to make themselves righteous men, as is the way
of all them that seek to be justified by the deeds of the law.

And herein lieth the great difference between the Pharisee and the
true Christian man. The Pharisee thinks, by acts of righteousness
he shall make himself a righteous man, therefore he cometh into
the presence of God well furnished, as he thinks, with his negative
and positive righteousness.

Grace suffereth not a man to boast it before God, whatever he saith
before me: "His soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him"
(Hab 2:4): And better is the poor in spirit, than the proud in
spirit. The Pharisee was a very proud man, a proud, ignorant man,
proud of his own righteousness, and ignorant of God's: for had
he not, he could not, as he did, have so condemned the Publican,
and justified himself.

[The Pharisee ignorant that he must be righteous before he can do
righteousness.]

And I say again, that all this pride and vain-glorious shew of the
Pharisee, did arise from his not being acquainted with this; that
a man must be good, before he can do good; he must be righteous,
before he can do righteousness. This is evident from Paul, who
insinuateth this as the reason, why "none do good," even because
There is none that is righteous, no, not one. "There is none
righteous," saith he; and then follows, "There is none that doeth
good." (Rom 3:10-12) For it is not possible for a man, that is not
first made righteous by the God of heaven, to do anything that in
a proper, in a law, or in a gospel-sense may be called righteousness.
Meddle with righteous things he may; attempt to make himself
a righteous man, by his so meddling with them, he may; but work
righteousness, and so by such works of righteousness, make himself
a righteous man, he cannot.

The righteousness of a carnal man, is indeed by God called
righteousness; but it must be understood, as spoken in the dialect
of the world; or with reference to the world's matters. The world
indeed calls it righteousness; and it will do no harm, if it
bear that term with reference to worldly matters. Hence worldly
civilians are called good and righteous men, and so, such as
Christ, under that notion, neither died for, nor giveth his grace
unto. (Rom 5:7,8) But we are not now discoursing about any other
righteousness, than that which is so accounted either in a law, or
in a gospel-sense; and therefore let us a little more touch upon
that.

A man then must be righteous in a law-sense, before he can do acts
of righteousness, I mean that are such, in a gospel-sense. Hence
first, you have true gospel-righteousness made the fruit of a
second birth. "If ye know that he [Christ] is righteous, ye know
that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him." (1 John
2:29) Not born of him by virtue of his own righteous actions, but
born of him by virtue of Christ's mighty working with his word
upon the soul; who afterwards, from a principle of life, acteth
and worketh righteousness.

And he saith again, "Little children, let no man deceive you, he
that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous."
(1 John 3:7) Upon this scripture, I will a little comment, for the
proof of what is urged before; namely, that a man must be righteous
in a law-sense, before he can do such things that may be called acts
of righteousness in a gospel-sense. And for this, this scripture,
ministereth to us two things to be considered by us.

The first is, that he that doeth righteousness is righteous.

The second is, that he that doeth righteousness is righteous, as
Christ is righteous.

First, He that doeth righteousness; that is, righteousness which
the gospel calleth so, is righteous; that is, precedent to, or
before he doth that righteousness. For he doth not say, he shall
make his person righteous by acts of righteousness that he shall
do; for then an evil tree may bear good fruit: yea, and may make
itself good by doing so: But he saith, he that doeth righteousness
is righteous; as he saith, he that doeth righteousness IS born of
him.

So then, a man must be righteous before he can do righteousness,
before he can do righteousness in a gospel-sense.

Second, Our second thing then is to inquire, with what righteousness
a man must be righteous, before he can do that which in a gospel-sense
is called righteousness?

And first, I answer, He must be righteous in a law-sense; that is,
he must be righteous in the judgment of the law. This is evident,
because he saith, he that doeth righteousness is righteous as
he is righteous. That is, in a law-sense; for Christ in no sense
is righteous in the judgment of charity only; but in his meanest
acts, if it be lawful to make such comparison, he was righteous
in a law-sense, or in the judgment of the law. Now the apostle
saith, "That he that doeth righteousness IS righteous, as HE is
righteous." They are the words of God, and therefore I cannot err
in quoting of them, though I may not so fully, as I would, make
the glory of them shine in speaking to them.

But what righteousness is that, with which a man must stand righteous
in the judgment of the law, before he shall or can be found to do
acts of righteousness, that by the gospel are so called? I answer.

First, It is none of his own which is of the law, you may be sure;
for he hath this righteousness before he doeth any that can be
called his own. "He that doeth righteousness is righteous" already,
precedent to, or before he doth that righteousness; yea, he is
righteous before, even as HE is righteous.

Second, It cannot be his own which is of the gospel; that is,
that which floweth from a principle of grace in the soul: for he
is righteous before he doeth this righteousness. He that doeth
righteousness, IS righteous. He doth not say he that hath done it,
but he that doeth it; respecting the act while it is in doing, he
is righteous. He is righteous even then, when he is a doing of the
very first act of righteousness; but an act, while it is in doing,
cannot, until it is done, be called an act of righteousness; yet,
saith the text, "He is righteous."

But again, if an act, while it is in doing, cannot be called an
act of righteousness; to be sure, it cannot have such influences
as to make the actor righteous; to make him righteous, as the Son
of God is righteous, and yet the righteousness with which this
doer is made righteous, and that before he doeth righteousness,
is such; for so saith the text, that makes him righteous as he is
righteous.

Besides, it cannot be his own, which is gospel-righteousness, flowing
from a principle of grace in the soul; for that in its greatest
perfection in us, while we live in this world, is accompanied with
some imperfections; to wit, our faith, love, and whole course of
holiness is wanting, or hath something lacking in it. They neither
are apart, nor when put all together, perfect, as to the degree,
the uttermost degree of perfection.

But the righteousness under consideration, with which the man,
in that of John, is made righteous, is a perfect righteousness;
not only with respect to the nature of it, as a penny is as
perfect silver as a shilling; nor yet with respect to a comparative
degree; for so a shilling arriveth more toward the perfection of
the number twenty, than doth a two-penny or a three-penny piece:
but it is a righteousness so perfect, that nothing can be added
to it, nor can any thing be taken from it: for so implieth the
words of the text, "he is righteous, as Christ is righteous." Yea,
thus righteous before, and in order to his doing of righteousness.
And in this he is like unto the Son of God, who was also
righteous before he did acts of righteousness referring to a law
of commandment: wherefore it is said, that as he is, so are we
in this world. As he is or was righteous, before he did acts of
righteousness among men by a law, so are HIS righteous, before they
act righteousness among men by a law. "He that doth righteousness
is righteous, as HE is righteous."

Christ was righteous, before he did righteousness, with a two-fold
righteousness. He had a righteousness as he was God; his godhead
was perfectly righteous; yea, it was righteousness itself. His
human nature was perfectly righteous, it was naturally spotless
and undefiled. Thus his person was righteous, and so qualified to
do that righteousness, that because he was born of a woman, and
made under the law, he was bound by the law to perform.

Now, as he is, so are we: not by way of natural righteousness,
but by way of resemblance thereunto. Had Christ, in order to his
working of righteousness, a two-fold righteousness inherent in
himself, the Christian, in order to his working of righteousness,
hath belonging to him a two-fold righteousness. Did Christ's
two-fold righteousness qualify him for that work of righteousness,
that was of God designed for him to do? Why the Christian's two-fold
righteousness doth qualify him for that work of righteousness,
that God hath ordained, that he should do and walk in this world.

But you may ask, what is that righteousness, with which a Christian
is made righteous before he doth righteousness?

I answer, It is a two-fold righteousness.

I. It is a righteousness put upon him.

II. It is a righteousness put into him. I. For the first, It
is righteousness put upon him, with which also he is clothed as
with a coat or mantle (Rom 3:22), and this is called the robe of
righteousness; and this is called the garments of salvation. (Isa
61:10)22 This righteousness is none other but the obedience of
Christ; the which he performed in the days of his flesh, and can
properly be called no man's righteousness, but the righteousness
of Christ; because no man had a hand therein, but he completed
it himself. And hence it is said, That "by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous." (Rom 5:19) By the obedience of one,
of one man Jesus Christ, as you have it in verse 15 for he came
down into the world to this very end; that is, to make a generation
righteous, not by making of them laws, and prescribing unto them
rules: for this was the work of Moses, who said, "And it shall
be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments
before the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us." (Deu 6:25,
24:13) Nor yet by taking away by his grace the imperfections of
their righteousness, and so making of that perfect by additions
of his own; but he makes them righteous by his obedience; not in
them, but for them, while he personally subjected himself to his
Father's law on our behalf, that he might have a righteousness to
bestow upon us. And hence we are said to be made righteous, while
we work not; and to be justified while ungodly (Rom 4:5), which
can be done by no other righteousness than that, which is the
righteousness of Christ by performance, the righteousness of God
by donation, and our righteousness by imputation. For, I say, the
person that wrought this righteousness for us, is Christ Jesus; the
person that giveth it to us, is the Father; who hath made Christ
to be unto us righteousness, and hath given him to us for this
very end, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him (1
Cor 1:30, 2 Cor 5:21), And hence it is so often said, One shall
say, surely in the Lord have I righteousness and strength. And
again, "In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and
shall glory." "This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,
and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." (Isa 45:24,25,
54:17)

This righteousness is that which justifieth, and which secureth the
soul from the curse of the law; by hiding, through its perfection,
all the sins and imperfections of the soul. Hence it follows,
in that fourth of the Romans, "Even as David also describeth
the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousness
without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord will not impute sin."

And this it doth, even while the person that by grace is made
a partaker, is without good works, and so ungodly. This is the
righteousness of Christ, Christ's personal performances, which
he did when he was in this world; that is that, by which the soul
while naked, is covered, and so hid as to its nakedness, from
the divine sentence of the law; "I spread my skirt over thee, and
covered thy nakedness." (Eze 16:8)

Now this obediential righteousness of Christ, consisteth of two
parts. 1. In a doing of that which the law commanded us to do. 2.
In a paying that price for the transgression thereof, which justice
hath said, shall be required at the hand of man; and that is the
cursed death. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die
the death; to wit, the death that comes by the curse of the law.
So then, Christ having brought in that part of obedience for us,
which consisteth in a doing of such obediential acts of righteousness
which the law commands; he addeth thereto the spilling of his
blood, to be the price of our redemption from that cursed death,
that by sin we had brought upon our bodies and souls. And thus
are the Christians made perfectly righteous; they have the whole
obedience of Christ made over to them; to wit, that obedience
that standeth in doing the law, and that obedience that standeth
in paying of a price for our transgressions. So then, Doth the
law call for righteousness? Here it is. Doth the law call for
satisfaction for our sins? Here it is. And what can the law say
any more to the sinner but that which is good, when he findeth in
the personal obedience of Christ for him, that which answereth to
what it can command, that which it can demand of us.

Herein then standeth a Christian's safety, not in a bundle of
actions of his own, but in a righteousness which cometh to him by
grace and gift; for this righteousness is such as comes by gift,
by the gift of God. Hence it is called the gift of righteousness,
the gift by grace, the gift of righteousness by grace, which is
the righteousness of one, to wit, the obedience of Jesus Christ.
(Rom 5:15-19)

And this is the righteousness by which, he that doth righteousness,
is righteous as HE is righteous; because it is the very self-same
righteousness, that the Son of God hath accomplished by himself.
Nor has he any other or more excellent righteousness, of which
the law taketh notice, or that it requireth, than this. For as for
the righteousness of his godhead, the law is not concerned with
that; for as he is such, the law is his creature, and servant,
and may not meddle with him.

The righteousness also of his human nature, the law hath nothing
to do with that; for that is the workmanship of God, and is as
good, as pure, as holy and undefiled, as is the law itself. All
then that the law hath to do with, is to exact complete obedience
of him that is made under it, and a due satisfaction for the breach
thereof, the which, if it hath, then Moses is content.

Now, this is the righteousness, with which the Christian, as to
justification, is made righteous; to wit, a righteousness, that
is neither essential to his godhead, nor to his manhood; but such
as standeth in that glorious person, who was such, his obedience
to the law. Which righteousness himself had, with reference to
himself, no need of at all, for his godhead; yea, his manhood was
perfectly righteous without it. This righteousness therefore was
there, and there only, necessary, where Christ was to be considered
as God's servant and our surety, to bring to God Jacob again,
and to restore the preserved of Israel. For though Christ was a
Son, yet he became a servant to do, not for himself, for he had
no need, but for us, the whole law, and so bring in everlasting
righteousness for us.

And hence it is said, that Christ did what he did for us: He became
the end of the law for righteousness for us; he suffered for us
(1 Peter 2:21); he died for us (1 Thess 5:10); he laid down his
life for us (1 John 3:16), and he gave himself for us. (Gal 1:4)
The righteousness then that Christ did fulfil, when he was in
the world, was not for himself simply considered, nor for himself
personally considered, for he had no need thereof; but it was for
the elect, the members of his body.

Christ then did not fulfil the law for himself, for he had no need
thereof. Christ again did fulfil the law for himself, for he had
need of the righteousness thereof; he had need thereof for the
covering of his body, and the several members thereof; for they,
in a good sense, are himself, members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones; and he owns them as parts of himself in many
places of the holy scripture. (Eph 5:30, Acts 9:4,5, Matt 25:45,
10:40, Mark 9:37, Luke 10:16, 1 Cor 12:12,27) This righteousness
then, even the whole of what Christ did in answer to the law, it
was for his, and God hath put it upon them, and they are righteous
in it, even righteous as he is righteous. And this they have before
they do acts of righteousness.

II. There is righteousness put into them, before they act righteous
things. A righteousness, I say, put into them; or I had rather
that you should call it a principle of righteousness; for it is a
principle of life to righteousness. Before man's conversion, there
is in him a principle of death by sin; but when he is converted to
Christ, there is put into him a principle of righteousness, that
he may bring forth fruit unto God. (Rom 7:4-6)

Hence they are said to be quickened, to be made alive, to be risen
from death to life, to have the Spirit of God dwelling in them;
not only to make their souls alive, but to quicken their mortal
bodies to that which is good. (Rom 8:11)

Here, as I hinted before, they that do righteousness are said to be
born of him, that is, antecedent to their doing of righteousness
(1 John 2:29), "born of him," that is, made alive with new spiritual
and heavenly life. Wherefore the exhortation to them is, "Neither
yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin:
but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the
dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God."
(Rom 6:13)

Now this principle must also be in men, before they can do that
which is spiritually and gospelly good: For whatever seeming good
thing any man doth, before he has bestowed upon him this heavenly
principle from God, it is accounted nothing, it is accounted sin
and abomination in the sight of God; for an evil tree cannot bring
forth good fruit: Men do not gather grapes of thorns; neither
of a bramble gather they figs. Either make the tree good and his
fruit good, or the tree evil and his fruit evil. (Luke 6:43-45)
It is not the fruit that makes the tree, but the tree that makes
the fruit. A man must be good, before he can do good, and evil
before he can do evil.

They be not righteous actions that make a righteous man; nor be
they evil actions that make a wicked man: for a tree must be a
sweeting tree before it yield sweetings;23 and a crab tree before
it bring forth crabs.24

This is that which is asserted by the Son of God himself; and it
lieth so level with reason and the nature of things, that it cannot
be contradicted. (Matt 7:16-18) "A good man out of the good treasure
of his heart, bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil man
out of the evil treasure of his heart, bringeth forth that which
is evil." (Luke 6:45) But this, notwithstanding all that can
be said, seemeth very strange to the carnal world; for they will
not be otherwise persuaded, but that they be good deeds that make
good men, and evil ones that make evil men: And so by such dotish
apprehensions do what in them lieth to fortify their hearts with
the mists of darkness against the clear shining of the word, and
conviction of the truth.

And thus it was from the beginning: Abel did his first services
to God from this principle of righteousness; but Cain would have
been made righteous by his deed; but his deed not flowing from
the same root of goodness, as did Abel's, notwithstanding he did
it with the very best he had, is yet called evil: For he wanted,
I say, the principles, to wit, of grace and faith, without which
no action can be counted good in a gospel sense.

These two things then, that man must have that will do righteousness.
He must have put upon him the perfect righteousness of Christ; and
he must have dwelling in him, as a fruit of the new birth, a principle
of righteousness. Then indeed he is a tree of righteousness, and
God is like to be glorified in, and by him; but this the Pharisee
was utterly ignorant of, and at the remotest distance from it.

[The righteousness of Christ, unto justification, must be imputed
to the Christian before he can attain the principle of righteousness
unto sanctification.]

Quest. You may ask me next, But which of these are first bestowed
upon the Christian, the perfect righteousness of Christ unto
justification, or this gospel principle of righteousness unto
sanctification?

Answ. The perfect righteousness of Christ unto justification, must
first be made over to him by an act of grace. This is evident,

1. Because, he is justified as ungodly; that is, whilst he is
ungodly: But it must not be said of them, that have this principle
of grace in them, that they are ungodly; for they are saints and
holy. But this righteousness, by IT God justifieth the ungodly,
by imputing it to them, when, and while they, as to a principle
of grace, are graceless.

This is further manifested thus: The person must be accepted before
the performance of the person can; "And the Lord had respect unto
Abel, and to his offering." (Gen 4:4) If he had respect to Abel's
person first, yet he must have respect unto it for the sake of
some righteousness; but Abel, in that, had no righteousness; for
that he acted after that God had had respect unto his person.25
"And the LORD had respect unto Abel, and to his offering: But unto
Cain, and to his offering, he had not respect."

The prophet Ezekiel also shows us this; where, by the similitude
of the wretched infant, and of the manner of God's receiving it to
mercy, he shows how he received the Jews to favour. First, saith
he, "I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness."
(16:8) There is justification; "I covered thy nakedness." But what
manner of nakedness was it? Was it utter nakedness, nakedness in
its perfection? Yes, it was then as naked as naked could be, even
as naked as in the day that it was born. And as thus naked, it
was covered, not with anything, but with the skirt of Christ; that
is, with his robe of righteousness, with his obedience, that he
performed by himself for that very purpose. For by the obedience
of one many are made righteous.

2. Righteousness unto justification must be first, because the
first duty that a Christian performeth to God, must be accepted,
not for the sake of the principle from which in the heart it flows,
nor yet for the sake of the person that acts it; but for the sake
of Christ, whose righteousness it is, by which, before the sinner,
he stands just before God. And hence it is said, "By faith Abel
offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain." (Heb 11:4)
By faith he did it; but faith hath respect to the righteousness
that justifies. For we are justified by faith, not by faith as
it is a grace, nor by faith as it is an acting grace; but by the
righteousness of faith; that is, by that righteousness that faith
embraceth, layeth hold of, and helpeth the soul to rest upon, and
to trust to, for justification of life, which is the obedience
of Christ. Besides, it is said, by faith he offered; faith then,
faith in Christ, was precedent to his offering.

Now since faith was in being and in act before his offer, and since
before his offer, he had no personal goodness of his own, faith
must look out from home: I say, it must look out to another than
to him in whom it resided for righteousness; and finding the
righteousness of Christ to be the righteousness, which by God
was designed to be performed for the justification of a sinner,
it embraces it, and through it offereth to God a more excellent
sacrifice than Cain.

Hence it follows, "by which he obtained witness that he was righteous."
By which, not by his offering, but by his faith. For his offering,
simply as an offering, could not have made him righteous, if
he had not been righteous before; "for an evil tree cannot bring
forth good fruit." Besides, if this be granted, why had not God
respect to Cain's offering, as well as to Abel's? For, did Abel
offer? so did Cain. Did Abel offer his best? so did Cain his. And
if with this, we shall take notice of the order of their offering,
Cain seemed to offer first, and so with the frankest will, and
forwardest mind; but yet, saith the text, "The Lord had respect
to Abel and to his offering." But why to Abel? Why, because his
person was made righteous before he offered his gift: "By which
he obtained witness that he was righteous." God testifying of his
gifts, that they were good and acceptable, because they declared
Abel's acceptation of the righteousness of Christ, for his justice,
through the riches of the grace of God.

By faith then, Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than
Cain. He shrouded himself under the righteousness of Christ, and
so, as out of that righteousness, he offered to God; God also
looking and finding him there, where also he could not have been,
as to his own apprehension, no otherwise than by faith, he accepted
of his gift; by which acceptation, for so you may understand it
also, God testified that he was righteous: For God receiveth not
the gifts and offerings of those that are not righteous, for their
sacrifices are an abomination unto him. (Prov 21:27)

Abel then was righteous before; he was, I say, made righteous first,
as he stood ungodly in himself; God justifieth the ungodly. (Rom
4) Now being justified, he was righteous; and being righteous, he
offered his sacrifice of praise to God, or other offerings which
God accepted, because he believed in his Son, as also other scriptures
manifest abundantly. But this our Pharisee understandeth not.

3. Righteousness by imputation must be first, because we are made
so, to wit, by another, "By the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous." Now to be made righteous, implies a passiveness
in him that is so made, and the activity of the work to lie in some
body else; except he had said, they had made themselves righteous;
but that it doth not, nor doth the text leave to any the least
countenance so to insinuate: Nay, it plainly affirms the contrary,
for it saith, by the obedience of one, of one man Jesus Christ,
many are made righteous; by the righteousness of one (Rom 5), So
then, if they be MADE righteous by the righteousness of one: I
say, if many be made righteous by the righteousness of one, then
are they that are so, as to themselves, passive and not active,
with reference unto the working out of this righteousness. They
have no hand in that; for that is the act of ONE, the righteousness
of ONE, the obedience of ONE, the workmanship of ONE, even of
Christ Jesus.

Again, if they are made righteous by this righteousness, then also
they are passive, as to their first privilege by it; for they are
made righteous by it; they do not make themselves righteous; no,
they do not make themselves righteous by it.

Imputation is also the act of God. Even as David also describeth
the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousness.
The righteousness then is the work of Christ, his own obedience
to his father's law; the making of it ours, is the act of his
father, and of his infinite grace; "But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness." "For
he [God] hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him." And both these
things God showed to our first parents when he acted in grace
towards them after the fall.

There it is said, the Lord God made unto Adam, and unto his wife,
coats of skins, and clothed them. (Gen 3:21)

Whence note,

(1.) That Adam and his wife were naked both in God's eye, and in
their own. (verse 10,11)

(2.) That the Lord God made coats of skins.

(3.) That in his making of them, he had respect to Adam and to his
wife, that is, he made them for them.

(4.) That when he had made them, he also clothed them therewith.

They made not the coats, nor did God bid them make them; but God
did make them himself to cover their nakedness with. Yea, when
he had made them, he did not bid them put them on, but he himself
did clothe them with them: For thus runs the text; "Unto Adam also
and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins, and clothed
them." O! It was the Lord God that made this coat, with which a
poor sinner is made righteous! And it is also the Lord God that
putteth it upon us. But this our Pharisee understandeth not.

But now, if a man is not righteous before he is made so, before
the Lord God has, by the righteousness of another, made him so;
then whether this righteousness come first or last, the man is
not righteous until it cometh, and if he be not righteous until
it cometh, then what works soever are done before it comes, they
are not the works of a righteous man, nor the fruits of a good tree,
but of a bad. And so again, this righteousness must first come
before a man be righteous, and before a man does righteousness.
Make the tree good and its fruit will be good.

Now, since a man must be made righteous before he can do
righteousness, it is manifest his works of righteousness do not
make him righteous, no more than the fig makes its own tree a
fig-tree, or than the grape doth make its own vine a vine. Hence
those acts of righteousness, that Christian men do perform, are
called the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to
the glory and praise of God. (Phil 1:11)

The fruits of righteousness they are by Jesus Christ, as the fruits
of the tree are by the tree itself. For the truth is, that principle
of righteousness, of which mention has been made before, and
concerning which I have said, it comes in, in the second place;
it is also originally to be found for us no where but in Christ.

Hence it is said to be by Jesus Christ, and again, "of his fulness
have all we received, and grace for grace." (John 1:16) A man must
then be united to Christ first, and so being united, he partaketh
of this benefit, to wit, a principle that is supernatural, spiritual,
and heavenly. Now his being united to Christ, is not of, or from
himself, but of, and from the Father, who, as to this work, is
the husbandman; even as the twig that is grafted into the tree,
officiateth not, that is, grafteth not itself thereinto, but is
grafted in by some other, itself being utterly passive as to that.
Now being united unto Christ, the soul is first made partaker of
justification, or of justifying righteousness, and now no longer
beareth the name of an ungodly man, for he is made righteous by
the obedience of Christ, he being also united to Christ, partaketh
of the root and fatness of Christ; the root, that is, his divine
nature; the fatness, that is, that fulness of grace that is laid
up in him to be communicated unto us, even as the branch that is
grafted into the olive-tree, partaketh of the root and fatness of
the olive-tree. Now partaking thereof, it quickeneth, it groweth,
it buddeth, and yieldeth fruit to the glory and praise of God.
(Rom 11:17)

But these things, as I have often said, the poor Pharisee was
ignorant of, when so swaggeringly he, with his, "God I thank thee,"
came into the temple to pray and indeed, in that which hath here
been said, is something of the mystery of God's will in his way
with his elect; and such a mystery it is, that it lieth hid for
ever to nature and natural men; for they think of nothing less
than of this, nor of nothing more, when they think of their souls
and of salvation, than that something must be done by themselves
to reconcile them to God. Yea, if through some common convictions
their understandings should be swayed to a consenting to that,
that justification is of grace by Christ, and not of works by
men; yet conscience, reason, and the law of nature, not being as
yet subdued by the power and glory of grace unto the obedience of
Christ, will rise up in rebellion against this doctrine, and will
overrule and bow down the soul again to the law and works thereof
for life.

4. Righteousness by imputation must be first, because, else faith,
which is a part, yea, a great part, of that which is called a
principle of grace in the soul, will have nothing to fix itself
upon, nor a motive to work by. Let this therefore be considered
by those that are on the contrary side.

Faith, so soon as it has being in the soul, is like the child that
has being in the mother's lap, it must have something to feed
upon, not something at a distance, afar off, or to be purchased,
I speak now as to justification from the curse, but something by
promise made over of grace to the soul; something to feed upon to
support from the fears of perishing by the curse for sin. Nor can
it rest content with all duties and performances, that other
graces shall put the soul upon; nor with any of its own works,
until it reaches and takes hold of the righteousness of Christ.
Faith is like the dove, that found no rest any where in all the
world until it returned to Noah into the ark. But this our Pharisee
understandeth not.

Objection. Perhaps some may object, That from this way of reasoning
it is apparent, that sanctification is first, since the soul may
have faith, and so a principle of grace in it; and yet, as yet it
cannot find Christ to feed and to refresh the soul withal.

Answ. From this way of reasoning it is not at all apparent, that
sanctification, or a principle of grace is in the soul before
righteousness is imputed, and the soul made perfectly righteous
thereby. And for the clearing up of this let me propose a few
things.

(1.) Justifying righteousness, to wit, the obedience of that one
man Christ is imputed to the sinner to justify him in God's sight.
For his law calls for perfect righteousness, and before that be
come TO, and put UPON the poor sinner, God cannot bestow other
spiritual blessings upon him; because by the law he has pronounced
him accursed; by the which curse, he is also so holden, until a
righteousness shall be found upon the sinner, that the law, and
so divine justice can alike approve of, and be contented with.
So then, as to the justification of the sinner, there must be
a righteousness for God; I say, for the sinner, and for God. For
the sinner to be clothed with, and for God to look upon, that he
may, for the sake thereof in a way of justice, bless the sinner
with forgiveness of sins: For forgiveness of sins is the next
thing that followeth upon the appearance of the sinner before God
in the righteousness of Christ. (Rom 4:6,7)

Now, upon this forgiveness, follows the second blessing. Christ
hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us. And so, consequently, hath obtained for us the forgiveness
of sins: for he that is delivered from the curse, hath received
forgiveness of sins, or rather is made partaker thereof; now being
made a partaker thereof, the second blessing immediately follows:
to wit, the blessing of Abraham, that is, "the promise of the spirit
through faith" (Gal 3:13,14), but this our Pharisee understandeth
not.

But now, although it be of absolute necessity that imputed righteousness
be first TO the soul; that is, that perfect righteousness be found
upon the sinner first by God, that he may bestow other blessings
in a way of justice. Yet it is not of absolute necessity that the
soul should see this first.

Let God then put righteousness, the righteousness of his Son upon
me; and by virtue of that, let the second blessing of God come
in to me; and by virtue of that, let me be made to see myself a
sinner, and Christ's righteousness, and my need of it, in the doctrine
of it, as it is revealed in the scriptures of truth. Let me then
believe this doctrine to be true, and be brought by my belief
to repentance for my sins, to hungering and thirsting vehemently
after this righteousness; for this is "the kingdom of God and his
righteousness." Yea, let me pray, and cry, and sigh, and groan
day and night to the God of this righteousness, that he will
of grace make me a partaker: And let me thus prostrate before my
God, all the time that in wisdom he shall think fit. And in his
own time he shall show me, that I am a justified person, a pardoned
person, a person in whom the Spirit of God hath dwelt for some
time, though I knew it not.

So then justification before God is one thing; and justification in
mine own eyes is another: not that these are two justifications,
but the same righteousness by which I stand justified before God,
may be seen of God, when I am ignorant of it; yea, for the sake
of it I may be received, pardoned, and accounted righteous of him,
and yet I may not understand it. Yea, further, he may proceed in
the way of blessing, to bless me with additional blessings, and
yet I be ignorant of it.

So that the question is not, Do I find that I am righteous? But
am I so? Doth God find me so, when he seeth that the righteousness
of his Son is upon me, being made over to me by an act of his grace?
For I am justified freely by his grace, through the redemption which
is in Jesus Christ, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
redemption of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God.
(Rom 3:25) But this our Pharisee understandeth not.

I am then made righteous first, by the righteousness of another;
and because I am thus righteous, God accepteth of my person as
such, and bestoweth upon me his grace; the which, at first, for
want of skill and experience in the word of righteousness, I make
use of but poorly, and have need to be certified that I am made
righteous, and that I have eternal life (Heb 5:13), not by faith
first and immediately, but by the written word, which is called
the word of faith; which word declareth unto me, to whom grace,
and so faith in the seed of it is given, that I have eternal life;
and that I should with boldness, in peace and joy, believe on the
Son of God. (Rom 15:13, 1 John 5:13) But,

Again, I, in the first acts of my faith, when I am come at Christ,
do not accept of him, because, I know I am righteous, either with
imputed righteousness, or with that which is inherent: both these,
as to my present privilege in them, may be hidden from mine eyes,
and I only put upon taking of encouragement to close with Christ
for life and righteousness, as he is set forth to be a propitiation
before mine eyes, in the word of the truth of the gospel; to which
word I adhere as, or because I find, I want peace with God in my
soul, and because I am convinced, that the means of peace is not
to be found any where but in Jesus Christ. Now, by my thus adhering
to him, I find stay for my soul, and peace to my conscience,
because the word doth ascertain me, that he that believeth on him
hath remission of sins, hath eternal life, and shall be saved from
the wrath to come.

But alas! who knows the many straights, and as I may say, the
stress of weather, I mean the cold blasts of hell, with which the
poor soul is assaulted, betwixt its receiving of grace, and its
sensible closing with Jesus Christ? 26 None, I daresay, but IT and
its FELLOWS. "The heart knoweth his own bitterness; and a stranger
doth not intermeddle with his joy." (Prov 14:10) No sooner doth
Satan perceive that God is doing with the soul, in a way of grace
and mercy, but he endeavoureth what he may, to make the renewing
thereof bitter and wearisome work to the sinner. O what mists,
what mountains, what clouds, what darkness, what objections, what
false apprehensions of God, of Christ, of grace, of the word,
and of the soul's condition, doth he now lay before it, and haunt
it with; whereby he fighteth, dejecteth, casteth down, daunteth,
distresseth, and almost driveth it quite into despair. Now, by the
reason of these things, faith, and all the grace that is in the
soul, is hard put to it to come at the promise; and by the promise
to Christ, as it is said, when the tempest and great danger of
shipwreck lay upon the vessel in which Paul was, They "had much
work to come by the boat." (Acts 27:16) For Satan's design is, if
he cannot keep the soul from Christ, to make his coming to him,
and closing with him, as hard, difficult, and troublesome, as he
by his devices can. But faith, true justifying faith, is a grace,
that is not weary by all that Satan can do; but meditateth upon
the word, and taketh stomach, and courage, fighteth, and crieth,
and by crying and fighting, by help from heaven, its way is made
through all the oppositions that appear so mighty, and draweth
up at last to Jesus Christ, into whose bosom it putteth the soul,
where, for the time, it sweetly resteth after its marvellous
tossings to and fro.27

And besides what hath been said, let me yet illustrate this truth
unto you by this familiar similitude.

Suppose a man, a traitor, that by the law should die for his sin,
is yet such an one, that the king hath exceeding kindness for; may
not the king pardon this man of his clemency; yea, order that his
pardon should be drawn up and sealed, and so in every sense be
made sure; and yet, for the present, keep all this close enough
from the ears, or the knowledge of the person therein concerned.
Yea, may not the king after all leave this person, with others
under the same transgression, to sue for, and obtain this pardon
with great expense and difficulty, with many tears and heart-achings,
with many fears, and dubious cogitations.

Why this is the case between God and the soul that he saveth; he
saveth him, pardoneth him, and secureth him from the curse and
death that to him is due for sin, but yet doth not tell him so, but
ascends in his great suit unto God for it. Only this difference
we must make in this between God and the potentates of this world:
God cannot pardon before the sinner stands before him righteous
by the righteousness of Christ; because he has in judgment, and
justice, and righteousness threatened and concluded, that he that
wants righteousness shall die.

And I say again, because this righteousness is God's, and at God's
disposal only; it is God that must make a man righteous before
he can forgive him his sins, or bestow upon him of his secondary
blessings; to wit, his Spirit, and the graces thereof. And I say
again, it must be this righteousness; for it can be no other, that
must justify a sinner from sin in the sight of God, and from the
sentence of his law. But

(2.) This is, and must be the way of God with the sinner, that
faith may not only have an object to work upon, but a motive to
work by.

Here, as I said, Faith hath an object to work upon, and that is the
person of Christ, and that personal righteousness of his, which
he in the days of his flesh did finish to justify sinners withal.
This is, I say, the object of faith for justification, whereunto
the soul by it doth continually resort. Hence David said to Christ,
"Be thou my strong habitation"; or as you have it in the margin,
"Be thou to me for a rock of habitation, whereunto I may continually
resort" (Psa 71:3): And two things he inserts by so saying.

The first is, That the Christian is a man under continual exercises,
sometimes one way, and sometimes another; but all his exercises
have a tendency in them more or less to spoil him; if he deals
with them hand to hand; therefore he is rather for flying than
standing; for flying to Christ, than for grappling with them in
and by his own power.

The second is, That Christ is of God, provided to be our shelter as
to this very thing. Hence his name is said to be a strong tower,
and that the righteous run into it, and are safe. (Prov 18:10) That
also of David in the 56th psalm is very pregnant to this purpose;
"Mine enemies," saith he, "would daily swallow me up, for they
be many that fight against me, O thou most high." And what then?
Why, "what time I am afraid," saith he, "I will trust in thee."
Thus you see, faith hath an object to work upon to carry the soul
unto, and to secure the soul in, in times of difficulty, and that
they are almost continually, and that object is Jesus Christ, and
his righteousness. But,

Again, as faith hath an object to work upon, so it hath a motive
to work by; and that is the love of God in giving of Christ to the
soul for righteousness. Nor is there any profession, religion, or
duty and performance, that is at all regarded, where this faith,
which by such means can work, is wanting. "For in Jesus Christ
neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but
faith which worketh by love." (Gal 5:6) So he saith not here, but
faith which acteth lovely, or but faith whose fruit is love, though
true faith hath love for its offspring, but faith which worketh
BY love; that is true saving justifying faith, as it beholdeth
the righteousness of Christ, as made over to the soul for
justification, so it beholdeth love, love to be the cause of its
so being made over. It beholdeth love in the Father, in giving of
his Son; and love in the Son, in giving of himself to be made
soul-saving righteousness for me. And this seeing, it worketh or
this apprehending, it worketh by it; that is, it is stirred up to
an holy boldness of venturing all eternal concerns upon Christ,
and also to an holy endeared affecting love of him for his sweet
and blessed redeeming love. Hence the apostle saith, "The love of
Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead: And that he died for all, that they
which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
him which died for them, and rose again." (2 Cor 5:14,15)

Thus then is the heart united in affection and love to the Father
and the Son, for the love that they have shewed to the poor sinner,
in their thus delivering him from the wrath to come. Nor doth
this love of God cause that the faith of the poor man should work
by IT to him alone, no; for by this love faith worketh, in sweet
passions and pangs of love, to all that are thus reconciled, as
this sinner seeth he is. The motive then, whereby faith worketh,
both as to justification, and sanctification, the great motive
to them, I say, is love, the love of God, and the love of Christ:
"We love him because he first loved us." That is, when our faith
hath told us so; for so are the words above, "We have known and
believed the love that God hath to us." And then, "We love him
because he first loved us." And then, "This commandment have we
from him, That he who loveth God, love his brother also." (1 John
4:16-21) But this our poor Pharisee understandeth not. But,

5. Righteousness by imputation must be first, to cut off boasting
from the heart, conceit, and lips of men, Wherefore he saith as
also was hinted before, That we are justified freely by the grace
of God, not through, or for the sake of an holy gospel principle
in us; but "through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ," &c.
"Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works?
Nay: but by the law of faith." (Rom 3:24,27) And this is the law
of faith that we are justified as afore [is shewn].

Nor can any man propound such an essential way to cut off boasting
as this, which is of God's providing: for what has man here to
boast of? No righteousness, nor yet of the application of it to
his soul. The righteousness is Christ's, not the sinner's. The
imputation is God's, not the sinner's. The cause of imputation
is God's grace and love, not the sinner's works of righteousness.
The time of God's imputing righteousness, is when the sinner was
a sinner, wrapped up in ignorance, and wallowing in his vanity;
not when he was good, or when he was seeking of it; for his
inward gospel goodness is a fruit of the imputation of justifying
righteousness, as has been already shewed. "Where is boasting then?"
Where is our Pharisee then, with his brags of not being as other
men are? It is excluded, and he with it, and the poor Publican
taken into favour, that boasting might be cut off. "Not of works,
lest any man should boast." There is no trust to be put in men,
those that seem most humble, and that to appearance, are farthest
off from pride, it is natural to them to boast; yea, to boast
now, now they have no cause to boast. For by grace are we saved
through FAITH, and that not of ourselves, it is the gift of God.
Not of works, lest any man should boast.

But if man is so prone to boast, when yet there is no ground
of boasting in him, nor yet in what he doeth, how would he have
boasted, had he been permitted by the God of heaven to have done
something, though that something had been but a very little
something towards his justification. But God has prevented boasting
by doing as he has done. (Eph 2:8,9) Nay, the apostle addeth
further, lest any man should boast, that as to good works, "we
are God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God hath before ordained, that we should walk in them."
(verse 10) Can the tree boast, because it is a sweeting tree,28
since it was not the tree, but God that made it such: Where is
boasting then? "But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption: That according as it is written, He that glorieth, let
him glory in the Lord." (1 Cor 1:30,31) Where is boasting then?
Where is our Pharisee then, with all his works of righteousness,
and with his boasts of being better than his neighbours?

Objection. It may be said, If we should be justified for the sake
of our inherent righteousness, since that righteousness is the
gift of God, will it not follow that boasting is in the occasion
thereof, cut off.

Ans. No, for although the principle of inherent righteousness be
the gift of God, yet it bringeth forth fruits by man, and through
man, and so man having a hand therein, though he should have never
so little, he has an occasion offered him to boast. Yea, if a man
should be justified before God by the grace, or the working of the
grace of faith in him, he would have ground of occasion to boast,
because faith, though it be the gift of God, yet as it acteth in
man, takes man along with it in its so acting; yea, the acting of
faith is as often attributed to the man by whom it is acted, and
oftener, than to the grace itself. How then can it be, but that
man must have a hand therein, and so a ground therein, or thereof
to boast.

But now! since justification from the curse of the law before God,
lieth only and wholly in God's imputing of Christ's righteousness
to a man, and that too, while the man to whom it is imputed, is
in himself wicked and ungodly, there is no room left for boasting
before God, for that is the boasting intended; but rather an
occasion given to shame and confusion of face, and to stop the
mouth for ever, since justification comes to him in a way so far
above him, so vastly without him, his skill, help, or what else
soever. (Eze 16:61-63)

6. Righteousness by imputation must be first, that justification
may not be of debt, but of mercy and grace. This is evident from
reason: It is meet that God should therefore justify us by a
righteousness of his own, not of his own prescribing, for that he
may do, and yet the righteousness be ours; but of his own providing,
that the righteousness may be his. "Now to him that worketh,
is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt." (Rom 4:4) If I
work for justifying righteousness, and that way get righteousness,
my justification is not of grace but of debt, God giveth it not
unto me, for he oweth it unto me; so then it is no longer his but
mine: Mine not of grace, but debt: And if so then, I thank him
not for remission of sins, nor for the kingdom of heaven, nor for
eternal life; for if justifying righteousness is of debt, then
when I have it, and what dependeth thereon, I have but mine own,
that which God oweth to me.

Nor will it help at all to say, but I obtain it by God's grace in
me, because that doth not cut off my work, nor prevent my having
of an hand in my justifying righteousness.

Suppose I give a man materials, even all materials that are necessary
to the completing of such or such a thing; yet if he worketh,
though the materials be mine, I am to him a debtor, and he deserveth
a reward. Thou sayest, God has given thee his Spirit, his grace,
and all other things that are necessary for the working up of
a complete righteousness. Well, but is thy work required to the
finishing of this righteousness? If so, this is not the righteousness
that justifieth, because it is such as has thy hand, thy workmanship
therein, and so obtains a reward. And observe it, righteousness,
justifying righteousness, consisteth not in a principle of
righteousness, but in works of righteousness; that is, in good
duties, in obedience, in a walking in the law to the pleasing of
the law, and the content of the justice of God.

I suppose again, that thou shalt conclude with me, that justifying
righteousness, I mean that which justifies from the curse of the
law, resideth only in the obedience of the Son of God; and that the
principle of grace that is in thee, is none of that righteousness,
no, not then when thou hast to the utmost walked with God according
to thy gift and grace: Yet if thou concludest that this principle
must be in thee, and these works done by thee, before this justifying
righteousness is imputed to thee for justification, thou layest
in a caveat against justification by grace; and also concludest,
that though thou art not justified by thy righteousness, but
by Christ, yet thou art justified by Christ's righteousness, for
the sake of thine own, and so makest justification to be still a
debt. But here the scripture doth also cut thee off: "Not for thy
righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart dost thou
go to possess their land"; which was but a type of heaven, and
if our righteousness cannot give us by its excellency a share in
the type, be sure, that for it, we shall never be sharers in the
antitype itself. "Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God giveth
thee not this good land to possess it, for thy righteousness; for
thou art a stiff-necked people." (Deu 9:5,6)

Gospel-performances therefore are not first; that was first, for
the sake of which, God did receive these people into favour with
himself, and that was a covenant righteousness; and where could
that covenant righteousness be found but in the prince, mediator,
and high priest of the covenant? For it was HE and HE only that was
appointed of God, nor could any but himself, bring in everlasting
righteousness. (Dan 9:24,25) This is evident from these texts
last mentioned; it was not for their righteousness, that they
possessed the land.

Again, As it was not for their righteousness, that they were
made possessors of the land, so it was not for the sake of their
righteousness, that they were made partakers of such a righteousness
that did make them possess the land. This is plain to reason; for
then inherent or inherent and personal righteousness, when by us
performed, is of worth to obtain of God a justifying righteousness.
But if it be of worth to obtain a justifying righteousness, then
it seems, it is more commodious to both parties than is justifying
righteousness. First, it is more commodious to him that worketh
it, for by it he obtaineth everlasting righteousness; and secondly,
it is more commodious unto him that receiveth it, else why doth
he for it give us a due debt, and so put upon us the everlasting
justifying righteousness.

Perhaps it will be objected, that God doth all this of grace; but
I answer, that these are but fallacious words, spake by the tongue
of the crafty. For we are not now discoursing of what rewards God
can give to the operations of his own grace in us, but whether
he can in a way of justice, or how he will, bestow any spiritual
blessings upon sinful creatures, against whom, for sin, he has
pronounced the curse of the law, before he hath found them in a
righteousness, that is proved to be as good justice and righteousness,
as is the justice and righteousness of the law, with which we have
to do.

I assert he cannot, because he cannot lie, because he cannot deny
himself: For if he should first threaten the transgression of the
law with death, and yet afterwards receive the transgressor to
grace, without a plenary satisfaction, what is this but to lie,
and to diminish his truth, righteousness, and faithfulness; yea,
and also to overthrow the sanction and perfect holiness of his
law. His mercy therefore must act so towards this sinner, that
justice may be content, and that can never be, without a justifying
righteousness.

Now what this justifying righteousness should be, and when
imputed, that is the question. I say, it is the righteousness or
the obedience of the Son of God in the flesh, which he assumed,
and so his own, and the righteousness of no body else, otherwise
than by imputation.

I say again, that this righteousness must be imputed first, that
the sinner may stand just in God's sight from the curse, and that
God might deal with him both in a way of justice as well as mercy,
and yet do the sinner no harm.

But you may ask, How did God deal with sinners before this
righteousness was actually in being?

I answer, He did then deal with sinners even as he dealeth with
them now; he justifieth them by it, by virtue of the suretiship
of him that was to bring it in. Christ became surety for us, and
by his suretiship laid himself under an obligation to bring in,
in time, for those for whom he became a surety, this everlasting
and justifying righteousness, and by virtue of this those of his
elect that came into and went out of the world, before he came
to perform his work, were saved through the forbearance of God.
Wherefore, before the Lord came, they were saved for the Lord's
sake, and for the sake of his name. And they that were spiritually
wise understood it, and pleaded it as their necessities required,
and the Lord for HIS sake also accepted them. (Heb 7:22, Rom 4:24,
Dan 9:17, Psa 25:11)

7. Righteousness by imputation must be first: that justification
may be certain; "therefore it is of faith, [of the righteousness
that faith layeth hold on] that it might be by grace; to the end
the promise might be sure to all the seed." (Rom 4:16) That the
promise, What promise? The promise of remission of sins, &c. might
be sure.

Now a promise of remission of sins supposeth a righteousness, a
righteousness going before; for there is no forgiveness of sins,
nor promise of forgiveness, but for the sake of righteousness: but
not for the sake of righteousness that shall be by us, but that IS
already found in Christ as head, and so imputed to the elect for
their remission. "God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." (Eph
4:32) For Christ's sake; that is, for the sake of the righteousness
of Christ. Therefore imputed righteousness must be first; yea, it
must be before forgiveness, and forgiveness is extended by God,
then when we lie in our blood, though to us it is manifested
afterwards.29 Therefore it is OF faith, he saith not BY it,
respecting the act of faith; but of, respecting the doctrine or
word which presenteth me with this blessed imputed righteousness:
"They that are of faith, are the children of faithful Abraham."
They that are of the doctrine of faith, for all the elect are the
sons of that doctrine in which is this righteousness of Christ
contained; yea, they are begotten by it of God to this inheritance,
to their comfortable enjoyment of the comfort of it by faith.

That "the promise might be sure to all the seed"; to all them
wrapped up in the promise, and so begotten and born. That it might
be sure, implying that there is no certain way of salvation for
the elect but this, because God can never by other means reconcile
us to himself; for his heavenly eyes perceive through and through
the silly cobweb righteousness that we work; yea, they spy faults
and sins in the best of our gospel performances. How then can God
put any trust in such people, or how can remission be extended
to us for the sake of that? Yea, our faith is faulty, and also
imperfect; how then should remission be extended to us for the
sake of that? But now the righteousness of Christ is perfect,
perpetual and stable as the great mountains, wherefore he is
called the rock of our salvation, because a man may as soon tumble
the mountains before him, as one would tumble a little ball, I
say, as soon as sin can make invalid the righteousness of Christ,
when, and unto whom, God shall impute it for justice. (Psa 36:6)
In the margin it is said, to be like the mountain of God; to wit,
that is called Mount Zion, or that Moriah on which the temple was
built, and upon which it stood: All other bottoms are fickle, all
other righteousnesses are so feeble, short, narrow, and thin, yea,
so specked and full of imperfections. "For what the law could not
do in that it was weak through the flesh," Christ did for us in
the similitude of sinful flesh. But what could not the law do? Why
it could not give us righteousness, nor strengthen us to perform
it. It could not give us any certain, solid, well-grounded hope of
remission of sin and salvation, "but the bringing in of a better
hope did, by the which we draw nigh unto God."

Wherefore this righteousness being imputed, justice findeth no
fault therewith, but consenteth to the extending to the sinner
those blessings that tend to perfect his happiness in the heavens.

8. Righteousness by imputation must be first, "that in all things
he [Christ] might have the pre-eminence." Christ is head of the
church, and therefore let him have the highest honour in the soul;
but how can he have that, if any precede as to justification,
before his perfect righteousness be imputed? If it be said, grace
may be in the soul, though the soul doth not act it, until the
moment that justifying righteousness shall be imputed.

I ask, What should it do there before, or to what purpose is it
there, if it be not acted? And gain, how came it thither, how got
the soul possession of it, while it was unjustified? Or, How could
God in justice give it to a person, that by the law stood condemned,
before they were quitted from that condemnation? And I say, nothing
can set the soul free from that curse, but the perfect obedience
of Christ; nor that either, if it be not imputed for that end to
the sinner by the grace of God.

Imputed, that is, reckoned, or accounted to him. And why should
it not be accounted to him for righteousness? Who did Christ bring
it into the world for, for the righteous or for sinners? no doubt
for sinners. And how must it be reckoned to them? when in circumcision
or in uncircumcision; not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision;
not as righteous, but as sinners. And how are they to consider of
themselves, even then when they first are apprehensive of their
need of this righteousness? Are they to think, that they are
righteous or sinners.

And again, How are they to believe concerning themselves, then when
they put forth the first act of faith towards this righteousness
for justification? Are they to think, that they are righteous or
sinners? Sinners, sinners doubtless they are to reckon themselves,
and as such to reckon themselves justified by this righteousness.
And this is according to the sentence of God, as appeareth by such
sayings.

"For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died
for the ungodly."

"But God commended his love toward us, in that, while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us."

"For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son," &c. (Rom 5:6,8,10)

Out of these words I gather these three things.

1. That Christ by God's appointment died for us.

2. That by his death he reconciled us to God.

3. That even then, when the very act of reconciliation was in
performing, and also when performed, we were ungodly, sinners,
enemies.

Now the act by which we are said to be reconciled to God while
ungodly, while sinners, and while enemies, was Christ's offering
himself a sacrifice for us, which is, in the words above-mentioned,
called his death. Christ died, Christ died for the ungodly,
Christ died for us while sinners. Christ reconciled us to God by
his death. And just as here Christ is said to die for us, so the
Father is said to impute righteousness to us; to wit, as we are
without works, as we are ungodly: "Now to him that worketh not,
but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness." (Rom 4:5) He worketh not, but is ungodly,
when this gracious act of God, in imputing of the righteousness
of Christ to him, is extended, the which when he shall believe,
his faith is counted to him for righteousness. And why should we
not have the benefit of the righteousness, while we are ungodly,
since it was completed for us while we were yet ungodly? Yea,
we have the benefit of it: "For--when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son." (Rom 5:10)

When I say, the benefit, I mean that benefit that we are capable
of, and that is justification before God; for that a man may be
capable of while he is in himself ungodly, because this justice
comes to him by the righteousness of another. True, was it to be
his own righteousness by which he was to be justified, he should
not, could not so be, as or while he is ungodly. But the righteousness
is Christ's, and that imputed by God, not as a reward for work,
or of debt, but freely by his grace, to the glory of it, and
therefore may be done, and is so, while the person concerned is
without works, ungodly, and a sinner.

And he that denieth that we are capable of this benefit while we
are sinners and ungodly, may with like reason deny that we are
created beings. For that which is done for a man without him, may
be done for him, not only at any time which they that do it shall
appoint, but for him while in any condition in this world. While
a man is a beggar, may not I make him worth ten thousand a year,
if I can and will; yea and yet he shall not know thereof in that
moment that I make him so? yet the revenue of that estate shall
really be his from the moment that I make him so, and he shall
know it too at the rent-day.

This is the case, we are sinners and ungodly; there is a righteousness
wrought out by Jesus Christ, the which God hath designed we shall
be made righteous by; and by it, if he will impute it to us, we
shall be righteous in his sight, even then when we are yet ungodly
in ourselves; "for he justifies the ungodly."

Now though it is irregular and blame-worthy in man to justify the
wicked, because he cannot for the wicked provide, and clothe him
with a justifying righteousness; yet it is glorious and for ever
worthy of praise for God to do it; because it is in his power not
only to forgive, but to make a man righteous, even then when he
is a sinner, and to justify him, as afore is proved, while he is
ungodly.

Objection. But it may be yet objected, That though God has received
satisfaction for sin, and so sufficient terms of reconciliation
by the obedience and death of his Son, yet he imputeth it not unto
us but upon condition of our becoming good.

Answ. This must not be admitted: For,

1. The scripture saith not so; but that we are reconciled to God by
the death of his Son, and justified too, and that while, or when
we are sinners and ungodly.

2. If this objection carrieth the truth in it, then it follows,
that the Holy Ghost, faith, and so all grace, may be given to us,
and we may have it dwelling in us, yea, acting in us, before we
stand righteous in the judgment of the law before God; for nothing
can make us stand just before God in the judgment of the law, but
the obedience of the Son of God without us. And if the Holy Ghost,
faith and so consequently the habit of every grace, may be in
us, acting in us, before Christ's righteousness be by God imputed
to us, then we are not justified as sinners and ungodly: but as
persons inherently holy and righteous before.

But I have over and over already shewed you, that this cannot be,
therefore righteousness for justification must be imputed first.
And here let me present the reader with two or three things.

(1.) That justification before God is one thing; and justification
to the understanding and conscience is another. Now, I am treating
of justification before God, not of it as to man's understanding
and conscience, and I say, a man may be justified before God, even
then when himself knoweth nothing thereof (Isa 40:2, Matt 9:2),
and so when and while he hath not faith about it, but is ungodly.

(2.) There is a justification by faith, by faith's applying of
that righteousness to the understanding and conscience, which God
hath afore of his grace imputed for righteousness to the soul for
justification in his sight. And this is that by which we, as to
sense and feeling, have peace with God: "Being justified by faith
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." (Rom 5:1)
And these two the Apostle keepeth distinct, a little lower in
this chapter: for after that he had said in the tenth verse, that
while "we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son": He addeth, "And not only so, but we also joy in God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement." (verse 11) Here you see that to be reconciled to God
by the death of his Son, is one thing; and for us actually, for
that I think he aimeth at, to receive by faith, this reconciliation,
is another. That is a thing over and above, and not only so, but
we have received the atonement.

(3.) Men do not gather their justification from God's single act
of imputing of righteousness, that we might stand clear in his
sight from the curse and judgment of the law; but from the word,
the which they neither see nor understand, till it is brought to
their understanding by the light and glory of the Holy Ghost.

We are not therefore in the ministry of the word to pronounce any
man justified, from a supposition that God has imputed righteousness
to him, since that act is not known to us, until the fruits that
follow thereupon do break out before our eyes; to wit, the signs
and effects of the Holy Ghost's indwelling in our souls. And then
we may conclude it; that is, that such a one stands just before
God, yet not for the sake of his inherent righteousness, nor yet
for the fruits thereof, and so not for the sake of the act of
faith, but for the sake of Jesus Christ his doing and suffering
for us.

Nor will it avail to object, That if at first we stand just before
God by his imputing of Christ's righteousness unto us, though
faith be not in us to act, we may always stand justified so; and
so what need of faith? For therefore are we justified, first, by
the imputation of God, as we are ungodly, that thereby we might
be made capable of receiving of the Holy Ghost, and his graces in
a way of righteousness and justice. Besides, God will have those
that he shall justify by his grace through the redemption that is
in Jesus Christ, to have the Holy Ghost, and so faith, that they
may know and believe the things not only that shall be, but that
already ARE, freely given to us of God. Now, says Paul, "we have
received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of
God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of
God." (1 Cor 2:12) To know, that is, to believe. It is given to
you to believe, who believe according to the working of his mighty
power, "and we have known and believed the love that God hath to
us," preceding to our believing. (1 John 4:16) He then that is
justified by God's imputation, shall believe by the power of the
Holy Ghost; for that must come, and work faith, and strengthen the
soul to act it, because imputed righteousness has gone before. He
then that believeth shall be saved; for his believing is a sign,
not a cause, of his being made righteous before God by imputation:
And he that believeth not shall be damned, because his non-belief
is a sign that he is not righteous, and a cause that his sins
abide upon him.

And thus much for the Pharisee, and for his information; and now
I come to that part of the text which remains, which part in special
respecteth the Publican.

[THE PUBLICAN'S PRAYER.]

And THE PUBLICAN, STANDING AFAR OFF, WOULD NOT LIFT UP SO MUCH AS
HIS EYES UNTO HEAVEN, BUT SMOTE UPON HIS BREAST, SAYING, GOD BE
MERCIFUL TO ME A SINNER.

What this Publican was, I have shewed you, both with respect to
his nation, office, and disposition. Wherefore I shall not here
trouble the reader as to that, with a second rehearsal of these
things; we now therefore come to his repentance in the whole and
in the parts of it; concerning which I shall take notice of several
things, some more remote, and some more near to the matter and
life of it.

But first let us see how thwart and cross the Pharisee and the
Publican did lie in the temple one to another, while they both
were presenting of their prayers to God.

First, The Pharisee he goes in boldly, fears nothing, but trusteth
in himself that his state is good, that God loves him, and that
there was no doubt to be made but of his good speed in this his
religious enterprize. But alas! poor Publican, he sneaks, he leers,
he is hardly able to crawl into the temple, and when he comes
there, stands behind, aloof off, as one not worthy to approach
the divine presence.

Second, The Pharisee at his approach hath his mouth full of
something, yea of many fine things, whereby he strokes himself over
the head, and in effect calls himself, and that in his presence,
one of God's white boys, that always kept close to his will, abode
with him; or as the prodigal's brother said, "Lo, these many years
do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment"
(Luke 15:29); But alas! poor Publican thy guilt, as to these pleas,
stops thy mouth, thou hast not one good thing to say of thyself,
not one rag of righteousness; thy conversation tells thee so, thy
conscience tells thee so; yea, and if thou shouldest now attempt
to set a good face on it, and for thy credit say something after
the Pharisee in way of thine own commendations, yet here is God
on the one side, the Pharisee on the other, together with thine
own heart to give thee check, to rebuke thee, to condemn thee,
and to lay thee even with the ground for thy insolency.

Third, The Pharisee in his approach to God, wipes his fingers of
the Publican's enormities, will not come nigh him, lest he should
defile him with his beastly rags: "I am not as other men are,--or
even as this Publican." But the poor Publican, alas for him, his
fingers are not clean, nor can he tell how to make them so; besides,
he meekly and quietly puts up this reflection of the Pharisee
upon him, and by silent behaviour, justifies the severe sentence
of that self-righteous man, concluding with him, that for his part,
he is wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and
not worthy to come nigh, or to stand by, so good, so virtuous, so
holy, and so deserving a man as our spangling Pharisee is.

Fourth, The Pharisee, as at feasts and synagogues, chose the chief
and first place for his person, and for his prayer, counting that
the Publican was not meet, ought not to presume to let his stinking
breath once come out of his polluted lips in the temple, till he
had made his holy prayer. And poor Publican, how dost thou hear
and put up this with all other affronts, counting even as the
Pharisee counted of thee, that thou wast but a dog in comparison
of him, and therefore not fit to go before, but to come as in
chains, behind, and forbear to present thy mournful and debrorous30
supplication to the holy God, till he had presented him with his,
in his own conceit, brave, gay, and fine oration.

Fifth, The Pharisee, as he is numerous in his repeating of his good
deeds, so is stiff in standing to them, bearing up himself, that
he hath now sufficient foundation on which to bear up his soul
against all the attempts of the law, the devil, sin and hell. But
alas, poor Publican! Thou standest naked; nay, worse than naked;
for thou art clothed with filthy garments, thy sins cover thy face
with shame: nor hast thou in, from, or of thyself, any defence
from, or shelter against the attempts, assaults, and censures of
thy ghostly enemies, but art now in thine own eyes, though in the
temple, cast forth into the open field stark naked, to the loathing
of thy person, as in the day that thou was born, and there ready
to be devoured or torn in pieces for thy transgressions against
thy God.

What wilt thou do Publican! What wilt thou do! Come, let's see,
which way wilt thou begin to address thyself to God; bethink thyself
man, has thou any thing to say, speak out man, the Pharisee by
this time has done, and received his sentence. Make an O yes;31
let all the world be silent; yea, let the angels of heaven come
near and listen; for the Publican is come to have to do with God!
Yea, is come from the receipt of custom into the temple to pray
to him.

"And the Publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as
his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner." And is this thy way poor Publican! O
cunning sinner! O crafty Publican! thy wisdom has outdone the
Pharisee, for it is better to apply ourselves to God's mercy, than
to trust to ourselves that we are righteous. But that the Publican
did hit the mark, yea, get nearer unto, and more into the heart
of God and his Son than did the Pharisee, the sequel of the matter
will make manifest.

Take notice then of this profound speech of the Publican, every
word is heavier than the earth, and has more argument in it, than
has ten thousand Pharisaical prayers. "God be merciful to me a
sinner." Yea, the Son of God was so delighted with this prayer,
that for the sake of it, he, even as a limner, draweth out the
Publican in his manner of standing, behaviour, gestures, &c. while
he makes this prayer to God: Wherefore we will take notice both
of the one and of the other; for surely his gestures put lustre
unto his prayer and repentance.

FIRST, His prayer you see is this, "God be merciful to me a sinner."

SECOND, His gestures in his prayer were in general three.

First, He stood afar off.

Second, He would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven.

Third, He smote upon his breast, with his fist, saying, "God be
merciful to me a sinner."

FIRST, To begin first with is prayer. In his prayer we have
two things to consider of. First, His confession: I am a sinner.
Second, His imploring of help against this malady: "God be merciful
to me a sinner."

[His Confession.]

First, In his confession divers things are to be taken notice of.
As,

1. The fairness and simplicity of his confession: A sinner: I am
a sinner; "God be merciful to me a sinner." This indeed he was,
and this indeed confesses; and this, I say, he doth of godly
simplicity. For, for a man to confess himself a sinner, it is to
speak all against himself that can be spoken. And man, as degenerate,
is too much an hypocrite, and too much a self-flatterer, thus to
confess against himself, unless made simple and honest about the
thing through the power of conviction upon his heart. And it is
yet worth your noting, that he doth not say he was, or had been,
but that at that time his state was such, to wit, a sinner. "God
be merciful to me a sinner," or who am, and now stand before thee
a sinner, or, in my sins.

Now a little to shew you what it is to be a sinner; for every one
that sinneth may not in a proper sense be called a sinner. Saints,
the sanctified in Christ Jesus, do often sin, but it is not proper
to call them sinners: But here the Publican calls himself a sinner;
and therefore in effect, calls himself an evil tree, one that hath
neither good nature, nor that beareth good fruit: one whose body
and soul is polluted, whose mind and conscience is defiled: one
who hath "walked according to the course of this world, and after
the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience." They
having their minds at enmity with or against God, and are taken
captive by the devil at his will. A sinner, one whose trade hath
been in and about sin, and the works of Satan all his days.

Thus he waves all pleas, and shews of pleas, and stoops his neck
immediately to the block. Though he was a base man, yet he might
have had pleas; pleas, I say, as well as the Pharisee, though not
so many, yet as good. He was of the stock of Abraham, a Jew, an
Israelite of the Israelites, and so a privileged man in the things
and religion of the Jews, else what doth he do in the temple?
Yea, why did not the Pharisee, if he was a heathen, lay that to
his charge while he stood before God? but the truth is, he could
not; for the Publican was a Jew as well as the Pharisee, and
consequently might, had he been so disposed, have pleaded that
before God. But that he would not, he could not, for his conscience
was under convictions, the awakenings of God were upon him;
wherefore his privileges melt away like grease, and fly from him
like the chaff of the summer threshing-floor, which the wind taketh
up and scattereth as the dust; he therefore lets all privileges
fall, and pleads only that he is "a sinner."

2. In this confession he judges and condemns himself: For, for a
man to say, "I am a sinner," is as much as to say, I am contrary to
the holiness of God, a transgressor of his law, and consequently
an object of the curse, and an heir of hell. The Publican therefore
goeth very far in this his confession, but this is not all; for,
for a man to confess that he is a sinner, is in the

3. Third place, to confess, that there is nothing in him, done, or
can be done by him, that should allure, or prevail with God to do
any thing for him. For a sinner cannot do good; no, nor work up
his heart unto one good thought: no, though he should have heaven
itself, if he could; or was sure to burn in hell fire for ever
and ever if he could not. For sin, where it is in possession and
bears rule, as it doth in every one that we may properly call a
sinner, there it hath the mastery of the man, hath bound up his
senses in cords and chains, and made nothing so odious to the soul
as are the things that be of the Spirit of God. Wherefore it is
said of such, that they are enemies in their minds; that the
carnal mind is enmity to God, and that wickedness proceedeth of
the wicked; and that the Ethiopian may as well change his skin,
or the leopard his spots, as they that are accustomed to do evil
may learn to do well. (Eph 2, Rom 8, 1 Sam 24:13, Jer 13:23)

4. In this confession, he implicitly acknowledgeth, that sin is
the worst of things, forasmuch as it layeth the soul without the
reach of all remedy that can be found under heaven. Nothing below,
or short of the mercy of God, can deliver a poor soul from this
fearful malady. This the Pharisee did not see. Doubtless he did
conclude, that at some time or other he had sinned; but he never
in all his life did arrive to a sight of what sin was: His knowledge
of it was but false and counterfeit, as is manifest by his cure;
to wit, his own righteousness. For take this for a truth undeniable,
that he that thinks himself better before God, because of his
reformations, never yet had the true knowledge of his sin: But
the poor Publican he had it, he had it in truth, as is manifest,
because it drives him to the only sovereign remedy. For indeed,
the right knowledge of sin, in the guilt and filth, and damning
power thereof, makes a man to understand, that not any thing but
grace and mercy by Christ, can secure him from the hellish ruins
thereof.

Suppose a man sick of an apoplexy unto death, and should for his
remedy make use only of those things that are good against the
second ague, would not this demonstrate that this man was not
sensible of the nature and danger of this disease. The same may
be said of every sinner, that shall make use only of those means
to justify him before God, that can hardly make him go for a good
Christian before judicious men. But the poor Publican, he knew the
nature of his disease, the danger of his disease; and knew also,
that nothing but mercy, infinite mercy could cure him thereof.

5. This confession of the Publican, declareth that he himself was
born up now, by an almighty, though invisible hand. For sin, when
seen in its colours, and when appearing in its monstrous shape
and hue, frighteth all mortals out of their wits, away from God;
and if he stops them not, also out of the world. This is manifest
by Cain, Judas, Saul, and others, who could not stand up before
God under the sense and appearance of their sin, but fly before
him, one to one fruit of despair, and one to another. But now this
Publican, though he apprehends his sin, and that himself was one
that was a sinner, yet he beareth up, cometh into the temple,
approaches the presence of an holy and sin-revenging God, stands
before him, and confesses that he is that ugly man, that man that
sin had defiled, and that had brought himself into the danger of
damnation thereby.

This therefore was a mighty act of the Publican. He went against
the voice of conscience, against sense and feeling, against the
curse and condemning verdict of the law; he went, as I may say,
upon hot burning coals to one, that to sin and sinners is nothing
but consuming fire.

Now then, did the Publican this of his own head, or from his now
mind? No verily, there was some supernatural power within that
did secretly prompt him on, and strengthen him to this most noble
venture. True, there is nothing more common among wicked men, than
to tick and toy, and play with this saying of the Publican, "God
be merciful to me a sinner"; not at all being sensible either
what sin is, or of their need of mercy. And such sinners shall
find their speed in the Publican's prayer, far otherwise than the
Publican sped himself; it will happen unto them much as it happened
unto the vagabond Jews, exorcists, who took upon them to call over
them that had evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus; that were
beaten by that spirit and made fly out of that house naked and
wounded. (Acts 19:13-16) Poor sinner, dead sinner, thou wilt say
the Publican's prayer, and make the Publican's confession, and
say, "God be merciful to me a sinner." But hold, dost thou do it
with the Publican's heart, sense, dread and simplicity? If not,
thou dost but abuse the Publican and his prayer, and thyself, and
his God; and shalt find God rejecting of thee and thy prayers,
saying, The Publican I know, his prayers, and tears, and godly
tears I know; but who or what art thou? And will send thee away
naked and wounded. They are the hungry that he filleth with good
things, but the rich and the senseless, he sendeth empty away.

For my part, I find it one of the hardest things that I can put my
soul upon, even to come to God, when warmly sensible that I am a
sinner, for a share in grace and mercy. Oh! methinks it seems to
me as if the whole face of the heavens were set against me. Yea,
the very thought of God strikes me through, I cannot bear up, I
cannot stand before him, I cannot but with a thousand tears say,
"God be merciful to me a sinner." (Ezra 9:15) At another time
when my heart is more hard and stupid, and when his terror doth
not make me afraid, then I can come before him and talk of my
sins, and ask mercy at his hand, and scarce be sensible of sin
or grace, or that indeed I am before God: But above all, they are
the rare times, when I can go to God as the Publican, sensible
of his glorious majesty, sensible of my misery, and bear up, and
affectionately cry, "God be merciful to me a sinner."

But again, the Publican by his confession, showeth a piece of the
highest wisdom that a mortal man can show; because by so doing, he
engageth as well as imploreth the grace and mercy of God to save
him. You see by the text he imploreth it; and now I will shew you
that he engageth it, and makes himself a sharer in it.

"He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth
and forsaketh them shall have mercy." (Prov 28:13) And again, "If
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." (1 John 1:9)

[He engageth it.] In the promise of pardon, He shall find mercy;
he shall have his sins forgiven. As also Solomon prays, that God
will forgive them that know their own sore, and they are indeed,
such as are sensible of the plague of their own heart. (2 Chron
6:29,30, 1 Kings 8:37,38) And the reason is, because the sinner is
now driven to the farthest point; for confession is the farthest
point, and the utmost bound unto which God has appointed the
Publican to go, with reference to his work. As it is said of Saul
to David, when he was about to give him Micah his daughter to
wife, "The king desireth not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins
of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies." (1 Same
18:25)

So says God in this matter, I desire no sacrifices, nor legal
righteousness to make thee acceptable to me, only acknowledge and
confess thine iniquity that thou hast transgressed against me.
(Jer 3:12,13) And though this by some may be thought to be a very
easy way to come at, and partake of, the mercy of God; yet let the
sensible sinner try it, and he shall find it one of the hardest
things in the world. And there are two things, to which man is
prone, that makes confession hard.

I. There is a great incidency in us to be partial, and not thorough
and plain in our confessions. We are apt to make half confessions;
to confess some, and hide some; or else to make feigned confessions,
flattering both ourselves, and also God, while we make confession
unto him; or else to confess sin as our own fancies apprehend, and
not as the word descries them. These things we are very incident
to: Men can confess little sins, while they hide great ones. Men
can feign themselves sorry for sin, when they are not, or else in
their confessions forget to judge of sin by the word. Hence it is
said, They turned to God, not with their whole heart, but as it
were feignedly. They spake not aright, saying, what have I done?
They flatter him with their lips, and lie unto him with their
tongues, and do their wickedness in the dark, and sin against him
with a high hand, and then come to him and cover the altar with
their tears. These things therefore, demonstrate the difficulty
of sincere confession of sin; and that to do it as it should, is
no such easy thing.

To right confession of sin, several things must go. As,

1. There must be found conviction for sin upon the spirit: for before
a man shall be convinced of the nature, aggravation, and evil of
sin, how shall he make godly confession of it? Now to convince
the soul of sin, the law must be set home upon the conscience by
the Spirit of God; "For by the law is the knowledge of sin." (Rom
3:20) And again, "I had not known sin except the law had said,
Thou shalt not covet." (Rom 7:7) This law, now, when it effectually
ministereth conviction of sin to the conscience, doth it by putting
of life, and strength, and terror into sin. By its working on the
conscience, it makes sin revive, "and the strength of sin is the
law." (1 Cor 15:56) It also increaseth and multiplieth sin, both
by the revelation of God's anger against the soul; and also by
mustering up, and calling to view sins committed, and forgotten
time out of mind. Sin seen in the glass of the law is a terrible
thing, no man can behold it and live. "When the commandment came,
sin revived, and I died"; when it came from God to my conscience,
as managed by an almighty arm, "then it slew me." And now is the
time to confess sin, because now a soul knows what it is, and sees
what it is, both in the nature and consequence of it.

2. To right confession of sin, there must be sound knowledge of God,
especially as to his justice, holiness, righteousness, and purity;
wherefore the Publican here begins his confession by calling
upon, or by the acknowledgement of his majesty: "God be merciful
to me a sinner." As if he should say, God, O God, O great God, O
sin-revenging God, I have sinned against thee, I have broken thy
law, I have opposed thy holiness, thy justice, thy law, and thy
righteous will. O consuming fire! for our God is a consuming fire,
I have justly provoked thee to wrath, and to take vengeance of me
for my transgressions. But, alas! how few, that make confession of
sin, have right apprehension of God, unto whom confession of sin
doth belong! Alas, 'tis easy for men to entertain such apprehensions
of God as shall please their own humours, and as will admit them
without dying, to bear up under their sense of sin, and that shall
make their confession rather facile, and fantastical, than solid
and heart-breaking. The sight and knowledge of the great God is to
the sinful man the most dreadful thing in the world; and is that
which makes confession of sin so rare and wonderful a thing. Most
men confess their sins behind God's back, but few to his face;
and you know there is ofttimes a vast difference in one thus doing
among men.

3. To right confession of sin, there must be a deep conviction of
the certainty and terribleness of the day of judgment. This John
the Baptist inserts, where he insinuates, that the Pharisees' want
of sense of, and the true confession of sin, was because they had
not been warned, or had not taken the alarm, to flee from the
wrath to come. What dread, terror, or frightful apprehension can
there be put into a revelation of sin, where there is no sense of
a day of judgment, and of our giving there unto God an account
for it. (Matt 3:7, Luke 3:7)

I say therefore, to right confession of sin there must be,

(1.) A deep conviction of the certainty of the day of judgment;
namely, that such a day is coming, that such a day shall be. This
the apostle insinuates, where he saith, "God commandeth all men
every where to repent; Because he hath appointed a day, in the
which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom
he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men,
in that he hath raised him from the dead." (Acts 17:30,31)

This will give a sense of what the soul must expect at that day
for sin, and so will drive to an hearty acknowledgment of it, and
strong cries for deliverance from it. For thus will the soul argue
that expecteth the judgment day, and that believes that he must
count for all there. O my heart! It is in vain now to dissemble,
or to hide, or to lessen transgressions; for there is a judgment
to come, a day in which God will judge "the secrets of men by his
Son," and at that day he will bring to light "the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsel of the heart." If it
must be so then, to what boot32 will it be now to seek to dissemble,
or to lessen in this matter. (1 Cor 4:5) This also is in the Old
Testament urged as an argument to cause youth, and persons of all
sizes to recall themselves to sobriety, and so to confession of
their sin to God; where the Holy Ghost saith ironically, "Rejoice,
O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things
God will bring thee into judgment." (Eccl 11:9) So again, "God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether good, or whether evil." (Eccl 12:14)

The certainty of this, I say, must go to the producing of a
sincere confession of sin, and this is intimated by the Publican,
who, with his confession, addeth a hearty crave for mercy, "God
be merciful to me a sinner." As if he should say, if thou art
not merciful to me, by thy judgment when thou comest I shall be
swallowed up; without thy mercy I shall not stand, but fall by
the judgment which thou hast appointed.

(2.) As there must be, for the producing of sincere confession of
sin, a deep conviction of the certainty, so there must also be of
the terribleness of the day of judgment. Wherefore the apostle,
makes use of the first, so of this to put men upon repentance, an
ingredient of which is sincere confession of sin. "For we must
all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath
done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terror
of the Lord, we persuade men." (2 Cor 5:10,11) The terror of the
Lord, as we see here, he makes use of that, to persuade men to
come by confession of sin, and repentance, to God for mercy.

And I am persuaded, that it will be found a truth one day that one
reason that this day doth so swarm with wanton professors, is,
because they have not begun at sound conviction for, nor gone to
God at first with sincere confession of sin. And one cause of that
has been, for that they did never seriously fall in with, nor yet
in heart sink under, either the certainty or terribleness of the
day of judgment.

O! the terrors of the Lord! the amazing face that will be put upon
all things before the tribunal of God. Yea, the terror that will
then be read in the face of God, of Christ, of saints and angels,
against the ungodly; whoso believes and understands it, cannot
live without confession of sin to God, and coming to him for mercy.

Mountains, mountains fall upon us, and cover us, will then the cry
of the ungodly be, and "hide us from the face of him that sitteth
upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For the great
day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?" This
terror is also signified where it is said, "and I saw a great white
throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the [very] earth
and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them.
And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the
books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book
of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave
up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the
dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according
to their works. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire.
This is the second death. And whosoever was not found written in
the book of life was cast into the lake of fire." (Rev 20) Here
is terror, and this terror is revealed afore-hand in the word of
the truth of God, that sinners might hear and read and consider
it, and so come and confess, and implore God's mercy.

The terror of the Lord, how will it appear, when he "shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ." (2 Thess 1:7-9)

The terror of the Lord, how will it appear, when his wrath shall
burn and flame out like an oven, or a fiery furnace before him,
while the wicked stand in his sight. (Matt 13:50)

The terror of the Lord, how will it appear, while the angels at
his commandment shall gather the wicked in bundles to burn them!
"As--the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it
be in the end of this world. The Son of Man shall send forth his
angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that
offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a
furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth."
(Matt 13:40-42) Who can conceive of this terror to its full with
his mind? Wherefore much more unable are men to express it with
tongue or pen; yet the truly penitent and sin-confessing Publican,
hath apprehension so far thereof, by the word of the testimony,
that it driveth him to God, with a confession of sin for an
interest in God's mercy. But,

4. To right and sincere confession of sin, there must be a good
conviction of a probability of mercy. This also is intimated by the
Publican in his confession; "God [saith he] be merciful to me a
sinner." He had some glimmerings of mercy, some conviction of a
probability of mercy, or that he might obtain mercy for his pardon,
if he went, and with unfeigned lips did confess his sins to God.33

Despair of mercy, shuts up the mouth, makes the heart hard, and
drives a man away from God; as is manifest in the case of Adam
and the fallen angels. But the least intimation of mercy, if the
heart can but touch, feel, taste, or have the least probability
of it, that will open the mouth, tend to soften the heart, and to
make a very Publican come up to God into the temple and say, "God
be merciful to me a sinner."

There must then be this holy mixture of things in the heart of a
truly confessing Publican. There must be sound sense of sin, sound
knowledge of God: deep conviction of the certainty and terribleness
of the day of judgment, as also of the probability of obtaining
mercy.

But to come to that which remains; I told you that there were two
things that did make unfeigned confession hard. The first I have
touched upon.

II. And now the second follows: And that is, some private, close
leaning to some piece or parcel of goodness, that a man shall
conceit that he hath done before, or is doing now, or that he
purposeth in his deceitful heart that he will do one of these
days, with which he hopes to prevail with God for the pardon of
his sins. This man to be sure knows not sin in the nature and evil
of it, only he has some false apprehensions about it. For where
the right knowledge of sin is in the heart, that man sees so much
evil in the least transgression, as that it would, even any one
sin, break the backs of all the angels of heaven, should the great
God but impute it to them. And he that sees this is far enough
off from thinking of doing to mitigate, or assuage the rigour of
the law, or to make pardonable his own transgressions thereby. But
he that sees not this, cannot confess his transgressions aright;
for the confession consisteth in the general, in a man's taking
to himself his transgressions, and standing in them, with the
acknowledgement of them to be his, and that he cannot stir from
under them, nor do any thing to make amends for them, or to palliate
the rigour of justice against the soul. And this the Publican did
when he cried, "God be merciful to me a sinner."

He made his sins his own, he took them to him, he stood before in
them, accounting that he was surely undone for ever if God did
not extend forgiveness unto him. And this is to do as the prophet
Jeremy bids; to wit, "only to acknowledge our iniquities," to
acknowledge them and to stand in them at the terrible bar of God's
justice, until mercy takes them out of the way; not shifting our
shoulders or conscience of them, by doing, or promising to do,
either this or that good work, only acknowledge, acknowledge only.
And the reason of this kind of confession is,

1. Because this carrieth in it the true nature of confession, to
confess, and to abide under the crimes confessed, without shifts
and evasions, is the only real simple way of confessions. "I said
I would confess my transgressions unto the Lord"; and what then,
"and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin." (Psa 32:5) Mark,
nothing comes in betwixt confession and forgiveness of sin, nothing
of works of righteousness, nothing of legal amendments, nothing
but an outcry for mercy; and that act is so far off from lessening
the offence, that it greatly heighteneth and aggravates it. That
is the first reason.

2. A second reason is, because God doth expect that the penitent
confessors should for the time that his wisdom shall think meet,
not only confess, but bear their shame upon them; yea, saith God,
"be thou confounded also and bear thy shame," when God takes away
thine iniquity, thou shalt be confounded and never open thy mouth
more because of thy shame. (Eze 16:52,63) We count it convenient
that men, when their crimes and transgressions are to be manifested,
that they be set in some open place, with a paper, wherein their
transgressions are inserted, pinned upon their back or their
forehead, that they may not only confess, but bear their own
shame.34 And at the penitential confession of sinners, God has
something of this kind to do; if not before men, yet before angels,
that they may behold, and be affected, and rejoice when they shall
see, after the revelation of sin, the sinner taken into the favour
and abundant mercy of God. (Luke 15)

3. A third reason is, For that God will in the forgiveness of sin,
magnify the riches of his mercy; but this cannot be, if God shall
suffer, or accept of such confession of sin, as is yet intermixed
with those things that will darken the heinousness of the offence,
and that will be darkened either by a partial, feigned, or overly
confession: or by a joining with the confession any of the sinners
pretended good deeds.

That God in the salvation, and so in the confession of the sinner,
designs the magnifying of his mercy, is apparent enough from the
whole current of scripture, and that any of the things now mentioned
will, if suffered to be done, darken and eclipse this thing, is
evident to reason itself.

Suppose a man stand indicted for treason, yet shall so order the
matter, that it shall ring in the country, that his offences are
but petty crimes; though the king shall forgive this man, much
glory shall not thereby redound to the riches and greatness of
his mercy. But let all things lie naked, let nothing lie hid or
covered, let sin be seen, shewn, and confessed, as it is with and
in the sinner himself, and then there will be in his forgiveness
a magnifying of mercy.

4. A fourth reason is, for that else God cannot be justified in
his sayings, nor overcome when he is judged. (Psa 51, Rom 3) God's
word hath told us what sin is, both as to its nature and evil effects.
God's word hath told us, that the best of our righteousnesses are
not better than filthy rags. God's word has also told us, that
sin is forgiven us freely by grace, and to for the sake of our
amendments: and all this God will have shewn, not only in the acts
of his mercy towards, but even in the humiliations and confessions
of the penitent: For God will have his mercy begin to be displayed
even there where the sinner hath taken his first step toward him:
"That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign
through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord."
(Rom 5:21)

5. A fifth reason is, because God would have by the Publican's
conversion, others affected with the displays and discoveries of
wonderful grace; but to cloud and cover it with lessening of sin,
and the sinful righteousness of man, is not the way to do this.
Wherefore the sinner's confession must be such as is full, nor
must anything of his to lessen sin come in betwixt confession and
mercy; and this is the way to affect others [who are] as bad as
Publicans and sinners, and to make them come in to God for mercy.

For what will such say when sin begins to appear to the conscience,
and when the law shall follow it with a voice of words, each one
like a clap of thunder? I say, what will such say when they shall
read that the Publican did only acknowledge his iniquity, and found
grace and favour at the hand of God? But that God is infinitely
merciful; merciful indeed, and that to those, or to such, as do
in truth stand in need of mercy. Also that he sheweth mercy of
his own good pleasure, nothing moving him thereto but the bounty
of his own goodness and the misery of his creature.

I say, this is the way to make others be affected with mercy; as
he saith, by the apostle Paul, "But God, who is rich in mercy,
for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead
in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, [by grace ye are
saved] and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the ages to come he might
shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward
us through Christ Jesus." (Eph 2:4-7) You may also see that: 1
Timothy 1:15, 16. 6. Another reason of this is, because this is
the way to heighten the comfort and consolation of the soul; and
that both here and hereafter. What tendeth more to this, than for
sinners to see, and with guilt and amazement to confess what sin
is, and so to have pardon extended from God to the sinner as such?
This fills the heart; this ravishes the soul! this puts a whole
heaven of joy into every one of the thoughts of salvation from
sin, and deliverance from wrath to come. "And the ransomed of the
Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy
upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall flee away." (Isa 35:10) Indeed the belief of
this makes joy and gladness endless: I say, it will make it begin
here, and make that it shall never have consummation in heaven.

7. Besides, it layeth upon the soul the greatest obligations to
holiness; what like the apprehension of free forgiveness, and that
apprehension must come in through a sight of the greatness of
sin, and of my inability to do anything towards satisfaction, to
engage the heart of a rebel and traitor to love his prince, and
to submit to his laws.

When Elisha had taken the Syrians captives, some were for using
severities towards them; but he said, "Set bread and water before
them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their master"; and
they did so. And what follows, "So the bands of Syria came no
more into the land of Israel." He conquered their malice with his
compassion. And it is the love of Christ that constraineth to live
to him. (2 Kings 6:22,23, 2 Cor 5:14)

Many other things might possibly be urged, but at present let these
be sufficient.

[His imploring of mercy.]

Second. The second thing that we made mention of in the Publican's
prayer was, an imploring of help against this malady; GOD BE
MERCIFUL TO ME A SINNER. In which petition I shall take notice of
several things.

I. That a man's help against sins, doth not so absolutely lie
in his personal conquest, as in the pardon of them. I suppose a
conquest, though there can indeed by man be none, so long as he
liveth in this world; I mean, a complete conquest and annihilation
of sin.

The Publican, and so every graciously awakened sinner, is doubtless
for the subduing of sin; but yet he looketh that the chief help
against it doth lie in the pardon of it. Suppose a man should
stab his neighbour with his knife, and afterwards burn his knife
to nothing in the fire, would this give him help against his
murder? No verily, notwithstanding this, his neck is obnoxious
to the halter, yea, and his soul to hell fire. But a pardon gives
him absolute help: "It is God that justifies, who shall condemn."
(Rom 8) Suppose a man should live many days in rebellion against
God, and after that leave off to live any longer so rebelliously,
would this help him against the guilt which he contracted before?
No verily, without remission there is no help, but the rebel is
undone. Wherefore the first blessedness, yea, and that without
which all other things cannot make one blessed, it lies in pardon.
"Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered." (Psa 32:1) "Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
not impute sin." (Rom 4:8)

Suppose a man greatly sanctified and made holy; I say, suppose
it; yet if the sins, before committed by him, be not pardoned, he
cannot be a blessed man.

Yet again, Suppose a man should be caught up to heaven, not having
his sins pardoned, heaven itself cannot make him a blessed man. I
suppose these things, not that they can be, but to illustrate my
matter. There can be not blessedness upon any man who yet remaineth
unforgiven. You see therefore here, that there was much of the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost in this prayer of the Publican. He was
directed the right, the only, the next35 way to shelter, where
blessedness begins even to mercy for the pardon of his sins. Alas!
What would it advantage a traitor to be taken up into the king's
coach, to be clothed with the king's royal robe, to have put upon
his finger the king's gold ring, and to be made to wear, for the
present, a chain of gold about his neck, if after all this the
king should say unto him, but I will not pardon thy rebellion;
thou shalt die for thy treason? Pardon then, to him that loves
life, is chiefest, is better, and more to be preferred and sought
after, than all other things; yea, it is the highest point of
wisdom in any sinner to seek after that first.

This therefore confuteth the blindness of some, and the hypocrisy
of others. Some are so silly, and so blind, as quite to forget and
look over the pardon of sin, and to lay their happiness in some
external amendments; when alas poor wretches, as they are, they abide
still under the wrath of God. Or if they be not quite so foolish
as utterly to forget the forgiveness of sin, yet they think of it,
but in the second place; they are for setting of sanctification
before justification, and so seek to confound the order of God;
and that which is worse unto them, they by so doing, do what they
can to keep themselves indeed from being sharers in that great
blessing of forgiveness of sins by grace.

But the Publican here was guided by the wisdom of heaven: He comes
into the temple, he confesseth himself a sinner, and forthwith,
without any delay, before he removeth his foot from where he stands,
craveth help of pardon; for he knew that all other things, if yet
he remained as involved in guilt, would not help him against that
damnation that belonged to a vile and unforgiven sinner.

This also confuteth the hypocrites, such as is our Pharisee here
in the text, that glory in nothing more, or so much, as that they
are "not as other men,--unjust, adulterers, extortioners, or even
as this Publican"; for these men have missed of the beginning of
good which is the forgiveness of sin; and if they have missed of
the first, of the beginning good, they shall never, as so standing,
receive the second, or the third: Justification, sanctification,
glorification, they are the three things, but the order of God
must not be perverted. Justification must be first, because that
comes to man while he is ungodly and a sinner.

Justification cannot be where God has not passed a pardon. A pardon
then is the first thing to be looked after by the sinner; this the
Pharisee did not, therefore he went down to his house unjustified;
he set the stumbling-block of his iniquity before his face when
he went to enquire of the Lord; and as he neglected, slighted,
scorned, because he thought that he had no need of pardon; therefore
it was given to the poor, needy, and miserable Publican, and he
went away with the blessing of it.

PUBLICANS, since this is so weighty a point, let me exhort you that
you do not forget this prayer of your wise and elder brother, to
wit, the Publican, that went up into the temple to pray. I say,
forget it not, neither suffer any vain-glorious or self-conceited
hypocrite to beat you with arguments, or to allure you with their
silly and deceitful tongues, from this most wholesome doctrine.
Remember that you are sinners, equal to, or as abominable as are the
Publicans, wherefore do you, as you have him for your pattern, go
to God, and to him confess in all simple, honest, and self-abasing-wise
your great, numerous, and abominable sins; and be sure that in the
very next place you forget not to ask for pardon, saying, "God be
merciful to me a sinner." And remember that heaven itself cannot
help you against, nor keep you from, the damnation and misery that
comes by sin, if 'twas possible you should go thither, if you miss
of pardon and forgiveness.

II. As the Publican imploreth help, so withal he closely approveth,
notwithstanding, of the sentence of the law that was gone out
against him. This is manifest, for he saith to God, "be merciful
to me"; and also in that he concludes himself "a sinner." I say,
he justifieth, he approveth of the sentence of the law, that was
gone out against him, and by which he now stood condemned in his
own conscience before the tribunal of God's justice. He saith not
as the hypocrite, "Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall
turn from me" (Jer 2:35); or "What have we spoken so much against
thee?" (Mal 3:13) No, he is none of these murmurers or complainers,
but fairly falls before the law, witnesses, judge and jury, and
consenteth to the verdict, sentence, and testimony of each of
them.

To illustrate this a little, suppose a malefactor should be
arraigned before a judge, and that after the witnesses, jury, and
judge, have all condemned him to death for his fact, the judge
again should ask him what he can say for himself why sentence of
death should not pass upon him? Now if he saith, nothing, but good,
my lord, mercy; he in sum confesseth the indictment, justifieth
the witnesses, approveth of the verdict of the jury, and consenteth
to the judgment of the judge.

The Publican therefore in crying mercy, justifieth the sentence of
the law that was gone out against his sins: He wrangleth not with
the law, saying, that was too severe, though many men do thus,
saying, God forbid, for then woe be to us. He wrangleth not
with the witness, which was his own conscience, though some will
buffet, smite, and stop its mouth, or command it to be silent. He
wrangleth not with the jury, which was the prophets and apostles,
though some men cannot abide to hear all that they say. He wrangleth
not with the judge, nor sheweth himself irreverently before him,
but in all humble-wise, with all manner of gestures that could
bespeak him acquiescing with the sentence, he flieth to mercy for
relief.

Nor is this alone the way of the Publican; but of other godly
men before his time: When David was condemned, he justified the
sentence and the judge, out of whose mouth it proceeded, and so
fled for succour to the mercy of God. (Psa 51) When Shemaiah the
prophet pronounced God's judgments against the princes of Judah
for their sin, they said, "The Lord is righteous." (2 Chron 12:6)
When the church in the Lamentations had reckoned up several of her
grievous afflictions wherewith she had been chastised of her God,
she, instead of complaining, doth justify the Lord, and approve
of the sentence that was passed upon her, saying, "The Lord
is righteous; for I have rebelled against his commandment." (Lam
1:18) So Daniel, after he had enumerated the evils that befell
the church in his day, addeth, "Therefore hath the Lord--brought
it upon us; for the Lord our God is righteous in all his works
which he doeth: for we obeyed not his voice." (Dan 9:14)

I know that all these do justify the judgment of God that was gone
out against them, as the Publican did the sentence wherewith he
was condemned. And I say, that unless a man doth come hither, his
confession and cry for mercy is not right, and so according to
the scripture, reason, and nature of things as they ought to be;
for he that has any other plea, why doth he cry God, Mercy! Surely
not because he concludes that what is done, is done justly and
righteously against him, but because he is overruled by spite,
prejudice, tyranny, or the like.

But this is not the case with our Publican. He has transgressed a
law that is holy, just, and good: the witness that accuseth him of
this, is God and his conscience; he is also cast by the verdict of
holy men of God; and all this he knows, and implicitly confesses,
even in that he directs his prayer unto his judge for pardon.
And it is one of the excellentest sights in the world to see, or
understand a sinner thus honestly receiving the sentence of the
law that is gone out against him; to see and hear a Publican thus
to justify God.36 And this God will have done for these reasons.

1. That it might be conspicuous to all that the Publican has need
of mercy. This is for the glory of the justice of God, because it
vindicates it in its goings out against the Publican. God loveth to
do things in justice and righteousness, when he goeth out against
men, though it be but such a going out against them as only tendeth
to their conviction and conversions. When he dealt with our father
Abraham in this matter, he called him to his foot, as here he
doth the Publican. And sinner, if ever God counts thee worthy to
inherit the throne of glory, he will bring thee hither. But,

2. The Publican, by the power of conviction stoops to, and falleth
under the righteous sentence gone forth against him, that it might
be also manifest that what afterward he shall receive is of the
mere grace and sovereign goodness of God. And indeed there is
no way that doth more naturally tend to make this manifest than
this. For thus; there is a man proceeded against for life, by the
law, and the sentence of death is in conclusion most justly and
righteously passed upon him by the judge. Suppose now that after
this, this man lives, and is exalted to honour, enjoys great
things, and is put into place of trust and power, and that by him
that he has offended, even by him that did pass the sentence upon
him. What will all say, or what will they conclude, even upon the
very first hearing of this story? Will they not say, well, whoever
he was that found himself wrapped up in this strange providence,
must thank the mercy of a gracious prince; for all these things
bespeak grace and favour. But,

3. As the Publican falleth willingly under the sentence, and
justifieth the passing of it upon him; so by his flying to mercy
for help, he declareth to all that he cannot deliver himself: He
putteth help away from himself, or saith, it is not in me.

This, I say, is another thing included in this prayer, and it is
a thing distinct from that but now we have been speaking to. For
it is possible for a man to justify and fall under the sentence of
the judge, and yet retain that with himself that will certainly
deliver him from that sentence when it has done its worst. Many
have held up their hand, and cried guilty at the bar, and yet
have fetched themselves off well enough for all that; but then
they have not pleaded mercy, for he that doth so, puts his life
altogether into the hands of another, but privilege or good deeds
either done or to be done by them. But the Publican in the text
puts all out of his own hand; and in effect saith to that God
before whom he went up into the temple to pray; Lord, I stand here
condemned at the bar of thy justice, and that worthily, for the
sentence is good, and hath in righteousness gone out against me;
nor can I deliver myself, I heartily and freely confess I cannot;
wherefore I betake myself only to thy mercy, and do pray thee to
forgive the transgressions of me a sinner. O how few be there of
such kind of Publicans! I mean of Publicans thus made sensible,
that come unto God for mercy.

Mercy with most, is rather a compliment, I mean, while they plead
it with God, than a matter of absolute necessity; they have not
awfully, and in judgment and conscience fallen under the sentence,
nor put themselves out of all plea but the plea of mercy. Indeed,
thus to do, is the effect of the proof of the vanity and emptiness
of all experiments made use of before. Now there is a two-fold
proof of experiments; the one is, the result of practice; the
other is, the result of faith.

The woman with her bloody issue made her proof by practice, when
she had spent all that she had upon physicians and was nothing
bettered, but rather grew worse. (Mark 5:26) But our Publican here
proves the emptiness and vanity of all other helps, by one cast
of faith upon the contents of the bible, and by another look upon
his present state of condemnation; wherefore he presently, without
any more ado, condemneth all other helps, ways, modes, or means
of deliverance, and betakes himself only to the mercy of God,
saying, "God be merciful to me a sinner."

And herein he showeth wonderful wisdom. For,

(1.) By this, He thrusts himself under the shelter and blessing of
the promise: and I am sure it is better and safer to do so, than
to rely upon the best of excellences that this world can afford.
(Hosea 14:1-4)

(2.) He takes the ready way to please God; for God takes more delight
in showing of mercy, than in any thing that we can do. (Hosea 6:6,
Matt 9:13, 12:7) Yea and that also is the man that pleaseth him,
even he that hopes in his mercy. (Psa 147:11) The Publican therefore,
whatever the Pharisee might think, stood all this while upon sure
ground, and had by far the start of him for heaven. Alas! his
dull head could look no further than to the conceit of the pitiful
beauty and splendour of his own stinking righteousness.37 Nor
durst he leave that to trust wholly to the mercy of God; but the
Publican comes out, though in his sins, yet like an awakened,
enlightened, resolved man, and first abases himself, then gives God
the glory of his justice, and after that the glory of his mercy,
by saying, "God be merciful to me a sinner"; and thus in the ears
of the angels he did ring the changes of heaven. Again,

(3.) The Publican, in his thus putting himself upon mercy, showeth,
that in his opinion there is more virtue in mercy to save, than
there is in the law and sin to condemn. And although this is not
counted a great matter to do, while men are far from the law, and
while their conscience is asleep within them; yet when the law
comes near, and conscience is awake, who so tries it, will find
it a laboursome work. Cain could not do thus for his heart, no,
nor Saul; nor Judas, neither. This is another kind of thing than
most men think it to be, or shall find it, whenever they shall
behold God's angry face, and when they shall hear the words of
his law.

However our Publican did it, and ventured his body, soul, and
future condition for ever in this bottom, with other the saints
and servants of God, leaving of the world to swim over the sea
of God's wrath if they will, in their weak and simple vessels of
bulrushes, or to lean upon their cobweb-hold, when he shall arise
to the judgment that he hath appointed.

In the mean time pray God awaken us as he did the Publican; pray
God enlighten us as he did the Publican; pray God grant us boldness
to come to him as the Publican did; and also in that trembling
spirit as he did, when he cried in the temple before him, "God be
merciful to me a sinner."

[His Gestures.]

THIRD. Thus having in brief passed over his prayer, we come in
the next place to his gestures; for in my judgment the right
understanding of them will give us yet more conviction of the
Publican's sense and awakening of spirit under this present action
of his.

And I have observed many a poor wretch that has readily had recourse
to the Publican's prayer, that never knew what the Publican's
GESTURES, in the presence of God, while in prayer before him, did
mean. Nor must any man be admitted to think, that those gestures
of his were in custom, and a formality among the Jews in those
days; for 'tis evident enough by the carriage of the Pharisee,
that it was below them and their mode, when they came into the
temple, or when they prayed any where else; and they in those
days were counted for the best of men, and men too in religious
matters they were to imitate and take their examples at the hands
of the best, not at the hands of the worst.

The Publican's gestures then, were properly his own, caused by the
guilt of sin, and by that dread of the majesty of God that was
upon his spirit. And a comely posture it was, else Christ Jesus,
the Son of God, would never have taken that particular notice
thereof as he did, nor have smiled upon it so much as to take it,
and distinctly repeat it as that which made his prayer the more
weighty, and the more also to be taken notice of. Yea, in mine
opinion, the Lord Jesus has committed it to record, for that he
liked it, and for that it shall pass for some kind of touchstone
of prayer, that is made in good sense of sin, and of God, and of
need of his goodness and mercy. For verily, all these postures
signify sense, sight of a lost condition, and a heart in good
earnest for mercy.

I know that they may be counterfeited, and Christ Jesus knows who
doth so too; but that will not hinder, or make weak or invalid
what hath already been spoken about it. But to forbear to make a
further prologue, and to come to the handling of particulars.

"And the Publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much
as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast."

Three things, as I told you already, we may perceive in these
words, by which his Publican posture, or gestures are set forth.

First. He stands afar off. Second. He would not lift up so much as
his eyes to heaven. Third. He smote upon his breast. First. For
the first of these, "He stood afar off." "And the Publican standing
afar off." This is, I say, the first thing, the first posture of
his with which we are acquainted, and it informeth us of several
things.

1. That he came not with senselessness of the majesty of God when
he came to pray, as the Pharisee did, and as sinners commonly do.
For this standing back, or afar off, declares that the majesty of
God had an awful stroke upon his spirit: He saw whither, to whom,
and for what, he was now approaching the temple. It is said in
that 20th of Exodus, That when the people saw the thunderings and
the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain
smoking, and all these were signs of God's terrible presence, and
dreadful majesty, they removed themselves, "and stood afar off."
(Exo 20:18) This behaviour therefore of the Publican did well become
his present action, especially since, in his own eyes, he was yet
an unforgiven sinner. Alas! What is God's majesty to a sinful man,
but a consuming fire? And what is a sinful man in himself, or in
his approach to God, but as stubble fully dry.

How then could the Publican do otherwise than what he did, than
stand afar off, if he either thought of God or himself. Indeed the
people afore-named, before they saw God in his terrible majesty,
could scarce be kept off from the mount with words and bounds, as
it is now the case of many: Their blindness gives them boldness;
their rudeness gives them confidence; but when they shall see
what the Publican saw, and felt, and understood as he, they will
pray, and stand afar off, even as these people did. They removed
and stood afar off, and then fell to praying of Moses that this
dreadful sight and sound might be taken from them. And what if I
should say, he stood afar off for fear of a blow, though he came
for mercy, as it is said of them, They stood "afar off for the
fear of her torment." (Rev 18:10)

I know what it is to go to God for mercy, and what it is to stand
all that while in my spirit through fear afar off, being possessed
with this, will not God now smite me at once to the ground for my
sins. David thought something when he said as he prayed, "Cast
me not away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from
me." (Psa 51:11)

There is none knows, but those that have them, what turns and
returns, what coming on and going off, there is in the spirit of a
man that indeed is awakened, and that stands awakened before the
glorious Majesty in prayer.38 The prodigal also made his prayer
to his Father intentionally, while he was yet a great way off. And
so did the lepers too; "And as he entered into a certain village,
there met him ten men that were lepers, which stood AFAR OFF: And
they lift up their voices and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on
us." (Luke 17:12,13)

See here, it has been the custom of praying men to keep their
distance, and not to be rudely bold in rushing into the presence
of the holy and heavenly majesty; especially if they have been
sensible of their own vileness and sins, as the prodigal, the
lepers, and our Publican was. Yea, Peter himself, when upon a time
he perceived more than commonly he did of the majesty of Jesus his
Lord, what doth he do! "When Simon Peter saw it," says the text,
"he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a
sinful man, O Lord." (Luke 5:8) Oh! when men see God and themselves,
it fills them with holy fear, of the greatness of the majesty of
God, as well as with love to, and desire after his mercy.

Besides, by his standing afar off, it might be to intimate that he
now had in mind, and with great weight upon his conscience, the
infinite distance that was betwixt God, and him. Men should know
that, and tremble in the thoughts of it, when they are about to
approach the omnipotent presence.

What is poor sorry man! poor dust and ashes, that he should crowd it
up, and go jostlingly in the presence of the great God? especially
since it is apparent, that besides the disproportion that is betwixt
God and him, he is a filthy, leprous, polluted, nasty, stinking,
sinful bit of carrion.39 Esther, when she went to supplicate the
king her husband for her people, made neither use of her beauty,
nor relation, nor other privileges of which she might have had
temptation to make use, especially at such a time, and in such
exigencies, as then did compass her about: But I say, she made
not use of them to thrust herself into his presence, but knew,
and kept her distance, standing in the inward court of his palace,
until he held out the golden sceptre to her; THEN "Esther drew
near, and touched the top of the sceptre." (Esth 5:2)

Men also when they come into the presence of God, should know their
distance; yea, and shew that they know it too, by such gestures
and carriages, and behaviors that are seemly. A remarkable saying
is that of Solomon. "Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house
of God, and be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of
fools; for they consider not that they do evil. [And as they should
keep their foot, so also he adds] Be not rash with thy mouth, and
let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for
God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be
few." (Eccl 5:1,2) Three things the Holy Ghost exhorteth to in
this text.

The one is, that we look to our feet, and not be forward to crowd
into God's presence.

Another is, That we should also look well to our tongues, that
they be not rash in uttering anything before God.

And the third is, because of the infinite distance that is betwixt
God and us, which is intimated by those words, "For God is in
heaven, and thou upon earth."

The Publican therefore shewed great wisdom, holy shame, and humility,
in this brave gesture of his, namely, in his standing afar off,
when he went up into the temple to pray. But this is not all.

2. The Publican, in standing afar off, left room for an advocate,
an high priest, a day's-man to come betwixt, to make peace between
God and this poor creature. Moses, the great mediator of the Old
Testament, was to go nigher to God than the rest of the leaders,
or of the people were. (Exo 20:21) Yea, the rest of the people
were expressly commanded to worship, standing afar off. (19:21)
No man of the sons of Aaron that hath a blemish was to come nigh.
"No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest,
shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the Lord made by fire:
He shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God." (Lev 21:21)

The Publican durst not be his own mediator, he knew he had a blemish,
and was infirm, and therefore he stands back; for he knew that it
was none of him that his God had chosen to come near unto him, to
offer the fat and the blood. (Eze 44:13-15) The Publican therefore
was thus far right: he took not up the room himself, neither with
his person, nor his performances, but stood back, and gave place
to the high priest that was to be intercessor.

We read, that when Zacharias went into the temple to burn incense,
as at that time his lot was, "The whole multitude of the people
were praying without." (Luke 1:9,10) They left him where he was,
near to God, between God and them, mediating of them; for the
offering of incense by the chief priest was a figurative making
of intercession for the people, and they maintained their distance.

It is a great matter in praying to God, not to go too far, nor
come too short in that duty. I mean in the duty of prayer, and a
man is very apt to do one or the other. The Pharisee went so far,
he was too bold, he came into the temple making such a ruffle
with his own excellences, there was in his thoughts no need of a
Mediator. He also went up so nigh to God, that he took up the room
and place of the Mediator himself; but this poor Publican, he knows
his distance, and kept it, and leaves room for the High Priest to
come and intercede for him with God. He stood afar off, not too
far off; for that is the room and place of unbelievers, and in
this sense that saying is true, "For, lo, they that are far from
thee shall perish" (Psa 73:27): That is, they whose unbelief hath
set them in their hearts and affections more upon their idols,
and that have been made to cast God behind their backs, to follow
and go a whoring after them.

Hitherto therefore it appears, that though the Pharisee had more
righteousness than the Publican, yet the Publican had more spiritual
righteousness than the Pharisee: And that though the Publican had
a baser, and more ugly outside than the Pharisee, yet the Publican
knew how to prevail with God for mercy better than he.

As for the Publican's posture of standing in prayer, it is excusable,
and that by the very father of the faithful himself: For Abraham
stood praying when he made intercession for Sodom. (Gen 18:22,23)
Christ also alloweth it where he saith, "And when ye STAND PRAYING,
forgive, if ye have ought against any: that your Father also which
is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses." (Mark 11:25) Indeed
there is no stinted order prescribed for our thus or thus behaving
of ourselves in prayer, whether kneeling, or standing, or walking
or lying, or sitting; for all these postures have been used by the
godly. "Paul KNEELED down and prayed." (Acts 20:36) Abraham and
the Publican STOOD and prayed. David prayed as he WALKED. (2 Sam
15:30,31) Abraham prayed LYING upon his face. (Gen 17:17,18) Moses
prayed SITTING. (Exo 17:12) And indeed prayer, effectual fervent
prayer, may be, and often is, made unto God, under all these
circumstances of behaviour: for God has not tied us to any of
them; and he that shall tie himself, or his people, to any one of
these, doth more than he hath warrant for from God; and let such
take care of innovating, it is the next way to make men hypocrites
and dissemblers in those duties, in which they should be sincere.

True, which of those soever a man shall chose to himself for the
present, to perform this solemn duty in, it is required of him,
and God expects it, that he should pray to him in truth, and with
desire, affection, and hunger, after those things, that with his
tongue he maketh mention of before the throne of God. And indeed
without this, all is nothing. But alas! how few be there in the
world whose heart and mouth in prayer shall go together? Dost
thou, when thou askest for the spirit, or faith, or love to God,
to holiness, to saints, to the word, and the like, ask for them
with love to them, desire of them, hungering after them? Oh! this
is a mighty thing! and yet prayer is no more before God, than as
it is seasoned with these blesssed qualifications. Wherefore it is
said, that while men are praying, God is searching of the heart,
to see what is the meaning of the spirit, or whether there be the
spirit and his meaning in all that the mouth hath uttered, either
by words, sighs, or groans; because it is by him, and through
his help only that any make prayers according to the will of God.
(Rom 8:26,27) Whatever thy posture therefore shall be, see that
thy prayers be pertinent and fervent, not mocking of thine own
soul with words, while thou wantest and art an utter stranger to
the very vital and living spirit of prayer.

Now our Publican, had, and did exercises, the very spirit of prayer
in prayer. He prayed sensibly, seriously, affectionately hungering,
thirsting, and with longing after that, for which with his mouth
he implored the God of heaven: His heart and soul were in his words,
and it was that which made his PRAYER; even because he prayed in
PRAYER; he prayed inwardly, as well as outwardly.

David tells us, that God heard the VOICE of his supplication, the
voice of his cry, the voice of his tears, and the voice of his
roaring. For indeed there are all these without this acceptable
sound in them, nor can any thing but sense, and affection, and
fervent desire, make them sound well in the ears of God. Tears,
supplications, prayers, cries, may be all of them done in formality,
hypocrisy, and from other causes, and to other ends than that which
is honest and right in God's sight: For God as he had experience
of, would search and look after the VOICE of his tears, supplications,
roarings, prayers, and cries.

And if men had less care to please men, and more to please God, in
the matter and manner of praying, the world would be at a better
pass than it is. But this is not in man's power to help, and to
amen: When the Holy Ghost comes upon men with greater conviction
of their state and condition, and of the use and excellency of
the grace of sincerity and humility in prayer, then, and not till
then, will the grace of prayer be more prized, and the spacious
flouting, complimentary lips of flatterers be more laid aside.
I have said it already, and I will say it again, that there is
now-a-days a great deal of wickedness committed in the very duty
of prayer; by words, of which men have no sense,40 by reaching
after such conclusions and clenches therein, as may make their
persons to be admired; by studying for, and labouring after such
enlargements as the spirit accompanieth not the heart in. O Lord
God, O Lord God, make our hearts upright in us, as in all points
and parts of our profession, so in this solemn appointment of God,
"If I regard iniquity in my heart," said David, "the Lord will
not hear me." But if I be truly sincere he will, and then it is
no mater whether I kneel, or stand, or sit, or lie, or walk; for
I shall do none of these, nor put up my prayers under any of these
circumstances, lightly foolishly, and idly, but to beautify this
gesture with the inward working of my mind and spirit in prayer;
that whether I stand or sit, walk or lie down, glory and gravity,
humility and sincerity shall make my prayer profitable, and my
outward behaviour comely in his eyes, with whom in prayer I now
have to do.

And had not our Publican been inwardly seasoned with these, Christ
would have taken but little pleasure in his modes and outward
behaviour: but being so honest inwardly, and in the matter of
his prayer, his gestures by that were made beauteous also; and
therefore it is that our Lord so delightfully dilateth upon
them, and draweth them out at length before the eyes of others.

I have often observed, that that which is natural, and so comely
in one, looks odiously when imitated by another, I speak as to
gestures and actions in preaching and prayer. Many, I doubt not,
but will imitate the Publican, and that both in the prayer and
gestures of the Publican, whose persons and actions will yet stink
full foully in the nostrils of him that is holy and just, and that
searcheth the heart and the reins.

Well, the Publican STOOD and prayed, he stood afar off, and prayed,
and his prayers came even to the ears and heart of God.

"AND THE PUBLICAN STANDING AFAR OFF, WOULD NOT LIFT UP SO MUCH AS
HIS EYES UNTO HEAVEN."

Second, We are now come to another of his postures. "He would
not, [says the text] so much as lift up his eyes to heaven." Here
therefore was another gesture added to that which went before;
and a gesture that a great while before had been condemned by the
Holy Ghost himself. "Is it such a fast that I have chosen? A day
for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a
bulrush." (Isa 58:5)

But why condemned then, and smiled upon now? Why! Because done
in hypocrisy then, and in sincerity now. Hypocrisy and a spirit
of error will so besmut God's ordinances, that he shall take no
pleasure in them: but sincerity, and honesty in duties, will make
even those circumstances that in themselves are indifferent, at
least comely in the sight of men. May I not say before God? the
Rechabites were not commanded of God, but of their father, to do
as they did; but, because they were sincere in their obedience
thereto, even God himself maketh use of what they did to condemn the
disobedience of the Jews; and moreover doth tell the Rechabites,
at last, that they should not want a man to stand before him for
ever. "And Jeremiah said unto the house of the Rechabites, Thus
saith the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed
the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts,
and done according unto all that he hath commanded you; therefore,
thus saith the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab the son
of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever." (Jer
35:18,19)

"He would not life up his eyes to heaven." Why? Surely because
shame had covered his face. Shame will make a man blush and hang
his head like a bulrush. Shame for sin is a virtue, a comely
thing; yea, a beauty-spot in the face of a sinner that cometh to
God for mercy.

God complains of the house of Israel, that they could sin, and
that without shame; yea, and threateneth them too with sore and
repeated judgments, "because they were not ashamed," it is in
Jeremiah 8:12. Their crimes in general were, they turned every one
to his course, as the horse runneth into the battle. In particular,
they were such as rejected God's word, they loved this world, and
set themselves against the prophet's crying peace, peace, peace,
when they cried judgment, judgment: "Were they ashamed when
they had committed abomination: nay, they were not at all ashamed,
neither could they blush: therefore shall they fall among them
that fall: in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down,
saith the Lord." Oh! to stand, or sit, or lie, or kneel, or walk
before God in prayer, with blushing cheeks for sin, is one of the
excellentest sights that can be seen in the world. Wherefore the
church taketh some kind of heart to herself in that she could lie
down in her shame; yea, and makes that a kind of an argument with
God, to prove that her prayers did come from her heart, and also
that he would hear them. (Jer 3:25)

Shame for sin argueth sense of sin, yea, a right sense of sin,
a godly sense of sin; Ephraim pleads this when under the hand of
God: "I was," saith he, "ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I
did bear the reproach of my youth." But what follows? "Is Ephraim
my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spake against
him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are
troubled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the
Lord." (Jer 31:19,20)

I know that there is a shame that is not the spirit of an honest
heart; but that rather floweth from sudden surprisal, when
the sinner is unawares taken in the act, in the very manner. And
thus sometimes the house of Israel was taken, and then when they
blushed, their shame is compared to the shame of a thief. "As
the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel
ashamed; they, their kings, their princes and their priests, and
their prophets."

But where were they taken, or about what were they found? Why they
were found "saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone,
Thou hast brought me forth." (Jer 2:26,27) God catched them thus
doing, and this made them ashamed, even as the thief is ashamed
when the owner doth catch him stealing of his horse.

But this was not the Publican's shame; this shame brings not a man
into the temple to pray, to stand willingly, and to take shame
before God in prayer. This shame makes one rather to fly from his
face, and to count one's self most at ease when they get farthest
off from God.

The Publican's shame therefore, which he demonstrateth that he had,
even by hanging down of his head, was godly and holy, and much
like that of the prodigal, when he said, "Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son." (Luke 15:21) I suppose that his postures were much the
same with the Publican's, as were his prayers, for the substance
of them. O however grace did work in both to the same end, they
were both of them, after a godly manner ashamed of their sins.

He would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven.

It saith not he could not, but he would not; which yet more fully
makes it appear that it was shame, not guilt, not guilt only or
chiefly, though it is manifest enough that he had guilt also by
his crying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I say, guilt was not
the chief cause of hanging down his head, because it saith, he
would not; for when guilt is the cause of stooping, it lieth not
in the will, or in the power thereof, to help one up.

David tells us, that when he was under guilt, his iniquities were
gone over his head: "As an heavy burden they are too heavy for
me." (Psa 38:4) And that with them he was bowed down greatly. Or,
as he says in another place, "Mine iniquities have taken hold upon
me, so that I am not able to look up" (Psa 40:12); I am not ABLE
to do it; guilt disableth the understanding and conscience, shame
makes all willingly fall and bare at the feet of Christ.

"He would not." He knew what he was, what he had been, and should
be, if God had not mercy upon him: Yea, he knew also that God
knew what he was, had been, and would be, if mercy prevented not;
wherefore thought he, Wherefore should I lift up the head? I am
no righteous man, no godly man; I have not served God, but Satan;
this I know, this God knows, this angels know, wherefore I will
not "lift up the head." It is as much as to say, I will not be an
hypocrite, like the Pharisee; for lifting up of the head signifies
innocency and harmlessness of life, or good conscience, and the
testimony thereof, under, and in the midst of all accusations.
Wherefore this was the counsel of Zophar to Job: "If thou prepare
thine heart, and stretch out thine hands towards him; If iniquity
be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell
in thy tabernacles. For then shalt thou lift up thy face without
spot; yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear." (Job
11:13-15)

This was not the Publican's state, he had lived in lewdness and
villany all his days; nor had he prepared his heart to seek the
Lord God of his fathers, he had not cleansed his heart nor hands
from violence, nor done that which was lawful and right. He only
had been convinced of his evil ways, and was come into the temple
as he was, all foul, and in his filthy garments, and amidst his
pollutions; how then could he be innocent, holy or without spot?
And consequently how could he lift up his face unto God? I remember
what Abner said to Asahel, "Turn thee aside, from following me;
wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I
hold up my face to Joab thy brother?" (2 Sam 2:22)

As if he had said, if I kill thee, I shall blush, be ashamed, and
hang my head like a bulrush, the next time I come into the company
of thy brother.

This was the Publican's case, he was guilty, he had sinned, he had
committed a trespass, and now being come into the temple, into the
presence of that God whose laws he had broken, and against whom
he had sinned, how could he lift up his head? how could he bear
the face to do it? No, it better became him to take his shame, and
to hang his head in token of guilt; and indeed he did, and did it
to purpose too, for he would not lift up, no, not so much as his
eyes to heaven.

True, some would have done it, the Pharisee did it; though if he had
considered, that hypocrisy, and leaning to his own righteousness
had been sin, he would have found as little cause to have done
it, as did the Publican himself. But, I say, he did it, and sped
thereafter; he went down to his house as he came up into the
temple, a poor unjustified Pharisee, whose person and prayers
were both rejected, because, like the whore of whom we read in
the Proverbs, after he had practised all manner of hypocrisy, he
comes into the temple "and wipes his mouth, and saith, I have done
no wickedness." (Prov 30:20) He lifts up his head, his face, his
eyes to heaven; he struts, he vaunts himself; he swaggers, he
vapours, and cries up himself, saying, "God, I thank thee, that
I am not as other men are."

True, had he come and stood before a stock or a stone, he might
have said thus, and not have been reprehended; for such are gods
that see not, nor hear, neither do they understand. But to come
before the true God, the living God, the God that fills heaven and
earth by his presence, and that knows the things that come into
the mind of man, even every one of them, I say, to come into his
house, to stand before him, and thus to lift up his head and eyes
in such hypocrisy before him: this was abominable, this was to
tempt God, and to prove him; yea, to challenge him to know what
was in man if he could even as those did who said, "How doth God
[see] know? can he judge through the dark cloud?" (Job 22:13, Psa
73:11)

But the Publican, no the Publican could not, durst not, would not
do thus: He would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven. As
who should say, O Lord, I have been against thee, a traitor and
a rebel, and like a traitor and rebel before thee will I stand. I
will bear my shame before thee in the presence of the holy angels;
yea, I will prevent thy judging of me by judging myself in thy
sight, and will stand as condemned before thee, before thou passest
sentence upon me.

This is now for a sinner to go to the end of things. For what is
God's design in the work of conviction for sin, and in his awakening
of the conscience about it? What is his end I say, but to make the
sinner sensible of what he hath done, and that he might unfeignedly
judge himself for the same. Now this our Publican doth; his will
therefore is now subject to the word of God, and he justifies
him in all his ways and works towards him. Blessed be God for any
experience of these things.

"He would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven." He knew by
his deeds and deservings that he had no portion there; nor would
he divert his mind from the remembering, and from being affected
with the evil of his ways.

Some men when they are under the guilt and conviction of their evil
life, will do what they can to look any ways, and that on purpose
to divert their minds, and to call them off from thinking on what
they have done; and by their thus doing, they bring many evils
more upon their own souls: for this is a kind of striving with
God, and a shewing a dislike to his ways. Would not you think, if
when you are shewing your son or your servant his faults, if he
should do what he could to divert and take off is mind from what
you are saying, that he striveth against you, and sheweth dislike
of your doings. What else means the complaints of masters and of
fathers in this matter? I have a servant, I have a son, that doth
contrary to my will. O but why do you not chide them for it: The
answer is, so I do; but they do not regard my words; they do
what they can, even while I am speaking, to divert their minds
from my words and counsels. Why, all men will cry out this is
base, this is worthy of great rebuke; such a son, such a servant
deserveth to be shut out of doors, and so made to learn better
breeding by want and hardship.

But the Publican would not divert his mind from what at present
God was about to make him sensible of, no, not by a look on
the choicest object, he would not lift up so much as his eyes to
heaven. They are but bad scholars, whose eyes, when their master
is teaching of them, are wandering off of their books.

God saith unto men, when he is a teaching them to know the evil
of their ways, as the angel said to the prophet, when he came to
shew him the pattern of the temple; "Son of man," says he, "behold
with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart
upon all that I shall shew thee; for to the intent that I might
shew them unto thee, art thou brought hither." (Eze 40:4) So to
the intent that God might shew to the Publican the evil of his
ways, therefore was he brought under the power of convictions,
and the terrors of the law; and he also like a good learner gave
good heed unto that lesson that now he was learning of God; for
he would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven.

Looking downwards doth ofttimes bespeak men very ponderous and deep
in their cogitations; also that the matter about which in their
minds they are now concerned, hath taken great hold of their spirits.
The Publican hath now new things, great things, and long-lived
things, to concern himself about: His sins, the curse, with death,
and hell, began now to stare him in the face; Wherefore it was no
time now to let his heart, or his eyes, or his cogitations wander,
but to be fixed, and to be vehemently applying of himself as a
sinner, to the God of heaven for mercies.

Few know the weight of sin, and how, when the guilt thereof takes
hold of the conscience, it commands homewards all the faculties
of the soul. No man can go out or off now. Now he is wind-bound,
or as Paul says, caught. Now he is made to possess bitter days,
bitter nights, bitter hours, bitter thoughts; nor can he shift them,
for his sin is ever before him. As David said, "For I acknowledge
my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me," in mine eye,
and sticketh fast in every one of my thoughts. (Psa 51:3)

He would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven. THIRD, BUT SMOTE
UPON HIS BREAST. This was the third and last of his gestures. He
smote upon his breast; to wit, with his hand, or with his fist.
I read of several gestures with the hand and foot, according to
the working and passions of the mind. 'Tis said Balak smote his
hands together, being angry because that Balaam had blessed and
not cursed for him the children of Israel. (Num 24:10)

God says also, that he had smitten his hands together, at the sins
of the children of Israel. (Eze 22:13) God also bids the prophet
stamp with his feet, and smite with his hand upon his thigh, upon
sundry occasions, and at several enormities, but the Publican here
is said to smite upon his breast. (Chron 6:11, 21:12) And,

1. Smiting upon the breast betokeneth sorrow for something done,
this is an experiment common among men. And indeed, therefore as
I take it, doth our Lord Jesus put him under this gesture in the
act and exercise of his repentance, because it is that which doth
most lively set it forth.

Suppose a man comes to great damage for some folly that he has
wrought, and he be made sorrowful for being and doing such folly:
There is nothing more common than for such a man, if he may,
to walk to and fro in the room where he is, with head hung down,
fetching ever and anon a bitter sigh: and smiting himself upon
the breast in his dejected condition; "But smote upon his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner."

2. Smiting upon the breast is sometimes a token of indignation and
abhorrence of something thought upon. I read in Luke, that when
Christ was crucified, those spectators that stood to behold the
barbarous usage that he endured at the hands of his enemies,
"smote their breasts and returned." "And all the people that came
together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote
their breasts, and returned." (Luke 23:48) Smote their breasts;
that is, in token of indignation against, and abhorrence of their
cruelty, that so grievously used the Son of God.

Here also we have our Publican smiting upon his breast, in token
of indignation against, and abhorrence of his former life. And
indeed without indignation against, and abhorrence of his former
life, his repentance had not been good. Wherefore the apostle doth
make indignation against sin, and against ourselves for that, one
sign of true repentance (2 Cor 7:11), and his indignation against
sin in general, and against his former life in particular,
was manifested by his smiting upon the breast. Even as Ephraim's
smiting upon the thigh was a sign and token of his: "Surely,"
says he, "after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I
was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth." (Jer
31:19) Man when he vehemently dislikes a thing, is very apt to
shew that dislike that to that thing he hath, by this or another
outward gesture: as in putting the branch to the nose,41 in
snuffing or snorting at it (Eze 8:17, Mal 1:13); or in deriding;
or, as some say, in blowing of their noses at it. (Luke 16:14) But
the Publican here chooseth rather to use this most solemn posture;
for smiting upon the breast, seems to imply a more serious, solemn,
grave way or manner of dislike, than any of those last mentioned
do.

3. Smiting upon the breast, seems to intimate a quarrel with the
heart for beguiling, deluding, flattering, seducing, and enticing
of him to sin: For as conviction for sin begets in man, I mean if
it be thorough, a sense of the sore and plague of the heart. So
repentance, if it be right, begets in the man an outcry against
the heart; for as much as by that light, by which repentance
takes occasion, the sinner is made to see, that the heart is the
fountain, and well-spring of sin. "For from within, out of the
heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,--covetousness,"
&c. (Mark 7:21,22) And hence it is, that commonly young converts
do complain so of their hearts, calling them wicked, treacherous,
deceitful, desperate ones.

Indeed one difference between true and false repentance lieth
in this. The man that truly repents crieth out of his heart; but
the other, as Eve, upon the serpent, or something else. And that
the Publican perceived his heart to be naught I conclude, by his
smiting upon his breast.

4. Smiting upon the breast, seems to intimate one apprehensive of
some new, sudden, strange and amazing thing: As when a man sees
some strange sight in the air, or heareth some sudden or dismal
sound in the clouds: Why, as he is struck into a deep damp in his
mind, so 'tis a wonder if he can keep or hold back from smiting
upon his breast.

Now ofttimes a sight of God and sense of sin, comes to the sinner
like a flash of lightning, not for short continuance, but for
suddenness, and so for surprisal; so that the sinner is struck,
taken and captivated to his own amazement, with what so unexpectedly
is come upon him. It is said of Paul at his conversion, that when
conviction of his bad life took fast hold of his conscience, he
trembled, and was astonished. (Acts 9:6) And although we read not
of any particular circumstance of his behaviour under his conviction
outwardly, yet it is almost impossibly but he must have some, and
those of the most solid sort. For there is such a sympathy betwixt
the soul and the body, that the one cannot be in distress or
comfort, but the other must partake of, and also signify the same.
If it be comfort, then 'tis shewn; If comfort of mind, then by
leaping, skipping, cheerfulness of the countenance, or some other
outward gesture. If it be sorrow or heaviness of spirit, then that
is shewed by the body, in weeping, sighing, groaning, softly-going,
shaking of the head, a lowering countenance, stamping, smiting
upon the thigh or breast as here the Publican did, or somewhat.

We must not therefore look upon these outward actions or gestures
of the Publican, to be empty insignificant things; but to be such,
that in truth did express and shew the temper, frame, and present
complexion of his soul. For Christ, the wisdom of God, hath mentioned
them to that very end, that in and by them, might be held forth,
and that men might see, as in a glass, the very emblem of a
converted, and truly penitent sinner. "He smote upon his breast."

5. Smiting upon the breast, is sometimes to signify a mixture of
distrust, joined with hope. And indeed in young converts, hope and
distrust, or a degree of despair, do work and answer one another,
as doth the noise of the balance of the watch in the pocket. Life
and death, life and death is always the motion of the mind then,
and this noise continues until faith is stronger grown, and until
the soul is better acquainted with the methods and ways of God
with a sinner. Yea, was but a carnal man in a convert's heart, and
could see, he should discern these two, to wit, hope and fear,
to have a continual motion in the soul: wrestling and opposing one
another, as doth light and darkness, in striving for the victory.

And hence it is that you find such people so fickle and uncertain
in their spirits; Now on the mount, then in the valleys; now in
the sunshine, then in the shade; now warm, then frozen; now bonny
and blithe, then in a moment pensive and sad; as thinking of a
portion nowhere but in hell. This will cause smiting on the breast;
nor can I imagine that the Publican was as yet farther than thus
far in the Christian's progress, since yet he was smiting upon
his breast.

6. Smiting upon the breast, seems to intimate, that the party so
doing is very apprehensive of some great loss that he has sustained;
either by negligence, carelessness, foolishness, or the like,
and this is the way in which men do lose their souls. Now to lose
a thing, a great thing, the only choice thing that a man has, negligently,
carelessly, foolishly, or the like, why it puts aggravations into
the thoughts of the loss that the man has sustained; and aggravations
in the thoughts of them go out of the soul, and come in upon a
sudden, even as the bailiff, or the king's sergeant at arms, and
at every appearance of them makes the soul start; and starting,
it smites upon the breast.

I might multiply particulars; but to be brief, we have before us a
sensible soul, a sorrowful soul, a penitent soul: one that prays
indeed, that prays sensibly, affectionately, effectually. One that
sees his loss, that fears and trembleth before God in consideration
of it, and one that knows no way, but the right way, to secure
himself from perishing, to wit, by having humble and hearty recourse
to the God of heaven for mercy.

I should now come to speak something by way of use and application;
but before I do that, I will briefly draw up, and present you with
a few conclusions that in my judgment do naturally flow from the
text, therefore in this place I will read over the text again.

"Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and
the other a Publican: The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself,
God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican: I fast twice in
the week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the Publican,
standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto
heaven, but smote upon is breast, saying, God be merciful to me
a sinner."

From these words I gather these several conclusions, with these
inferences.

Conclusion First, It doth not always follow, that they that pray
do know God, or love him, or trust in him. This conclusion is
evident by the Pharisee in the text; he prayed, but he knew not
God, he loved not God, he trusted not in God; that is, he knew him
not in his Son, nor so loved, nor trusted in him. He was, though
a praying man, far off from this. Whence it may be inferred, that
those that pray not at all cannot be good, cannot know, love, or
trust in God. For if the star, though it shines, is not the sun,
then surely a clod of dirt cannot be the sun. Why, a praying
man doth as far outstrip a non-praying man, as a star outstrips
a clod of earth. A non-praying man lives like a beast, nay worse,
and with reference to his station, a more sottish life than he.
"The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but
[this man] Israel doth not know, [but this man] my people doth
not consider." (Isa 1:3) The prayerless man is therefore of no
religion, except he be an Atheist, or an Epicurean. Therefore the
non-praying man is numbered among the heathens, and among those
that know not God, and is appointed and designed by the sentence
of the word to the fearful wrath of God. (Psa 79:6, Jer 10:25)

Conclusion Second, A second conclusion is, That the man that prays,
if in his prayer he pleads for acceptance, either in whole or in
part, for his own good deeds, is in a miserable state. This also
is gathered from the Pharisee here, he prayed, but in his prayer
he pleaded his own good deeds for acceptance, that is, of his
person, and therefore went down to his house unjustified. Now to
be unjustified is the worst condition that a man can be in, and
he is in this condition that doth thus. The conclusion is true,
forasmuch as the Pharisee mentioned in the parable is not so
spoken of, for the only sake of that sect of men, but to caution,
forewarn, and bid all men take heed, that they by doing as he,
procure not his rejection of God, and be sent away from his presence
unjustified. I do therefore infer from hence, that if he that
pleadeth his own good doing for personal acceptance with God, be
thus miserable; then he that teacheth men so to do, is much more
miserable. We always conclude, that a ring-leader in an evil way,
is more blame-worthy, than those that are led of him. This falls
hard upon the leading Socinians and others, who teach, that men's
works make their person accepted of God.

True, they say, through Christ; but that is brought in as a
blandation,42 merely to delude the simple with, and is an horrible
lie; for we read not in all the word of God, as to personal
justification in the sight of God from the curse, and that is the
question under consideration, that it must be by man's righteousness,
as made prevalent by Christ's, but contrariwise by his, and his
only, without the deeds, works, or righteousness of the law which
is our righteousness. Wherefore I say, the teachers and leaders
of this doctrine have the greater sin.

Conclusion Third, A third conclusion is. They that use high and
flaunting language in prayer, their simplicity and godly sincerity
is to be questioned, as to the doing of that duty sincerely. This
still flows from our text, the Pharisee greatly used this; for
higher and more flaunting language can hardly be found, than in
the Pharisee's mouth; nor will ascribing to God by the same mouth
laud and praise, help the business at all: For to be sure, where
the effect is base and rotten, the cause cannot be good.

The Pharisee would hold himself in hand that he was not as other
men, and then gives thanks to God for this: But the conclusion
was most vilely false, and therefore the praise for it could not
but be foolish, vain, and frivolous. Whence I infer, that if to
use such language in prayer is dangerous, then to affect the use
thereof is yet more dangerous: Prayer must be made with humble
hearts, and sensible words, and of that we have treated before,
wherefore high, flaunting, swelling words of vanity becomes not a
sinner's mouth, no, not at any time, much less when he comes to,
and presents himself before God in that solemn duty of prayer.
But, I say, there are some that so affect the Pharisee's mode,
that they cannot be well if in some sort or other they be not in
the practice of it; not knowing what they say, nor whereof they
affirm; but these are greatly addicted to hypocrisy, and to desire
of vain-glory, especially if the sound of their words be within
the reach of other men's ears.

Conclusion Fourth, A fourth conclusion is, that reformation and
amendment, though good, with, and before me, are nothing as to
justification with God. This is manifest by the condition of our
Pharisee; he was a reformed man, a man beyond others for personal
righteousness, yet he went out of the temple from God unjustified,
his works, came to nothing with God. Hence I infer, that the man
that hath nothing to commend him to God of his own, yet stands
as fair before God for justification, and so acceptance, as any
other man in the world.

Conclusion Fifth, A fifth conclusion is, it is the sensible
sinner, the self-bemoaning sinner, the self-judging sinner, the
self-abhorring sinner, and the self-condemning sinner, whose prayers
prevail with God for mercy. Hence I infer, that one reason why
men make so many prayers, and prevail no more with God, is because
their prayers are rather the floatings of Pharisaical fancies, than
the fruits of sound sense of sin, and sincere desire of enjoying
God in mercy, and in the fruits of the Holy Ghost.

The use and application we must let alone till another time.


FOOTNOTES:

1 The word "merit" was changed for "mercy" after the author's
death.--Ed.

2 "Not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commendeth." (2 Cor 10:18)

3 "Carry the bell and wear the garland," alluding to our old English
races; the winner being rewarded with a silver bell, and crowned
with a garland: or to the morris dance, in which the leader carried
the garland and danced with bells fixed to his dress.--Ed.

4 The glorious revolution, conducted by William, Prince of Orange,
afterwards King William the 3rd, took place soon after Bunyan's
decease. It was probably on this account that this paragraph was
omitted from the edition of September, 1688, and all the subsequent
ones to the present time. The popular opinion, in those times,
was, that Dutchman and extortioner were nearly synonymous.

"We trade wid de Yankey, we deal wid de Scot. And cheaten de tain
and de teither: We cheaten de Jew, aye and better dan dat, We
cheaten well ein aniether." Old Song.

5 "To pole, to peel," to take off the top and branches of a tree,
and then to peel off the bark; terms used to designate violent
oppressions under pretended legal authority. "Which pols and pils
the poor in piteous wise." Fairy Queen. "Pilling and polling is
grown out of request, since plain pilfering came into fashion."
Winwood's Memorials. "They had rather pill straws than read the
scriptures." Dent's Pathway.--Ed.

6 Immediately after the calling of Matthew and of James, our
Lord sat at meat in Levi's [James'] house, and made that gracious
declaration, "I am not come to call the righteous but sinners to
repentance"; compare Matthew 9:10-13, with Mark 2:14-17 and Luke
5:27-32.--Ed.

7 Nearly half this paragraph is omitted from every edition since
1688, probably from a fear lest it should be misinterpreted as
reflecting upon the glorious revolution under William and Mary.--Ed.

8 This proud beggar shews not his wounds but his worth; not his
rags, but his robes; not his misery, but his stoutheartedness: he
brings in God Almighty as a debtor to him for his services, and
thanks God more that others were bad, than for his own fancied
goodness.--Ryland.

9 The word "criminal," used by Bunyan, has been altered in modern
editions to "ceremonial"; but it was not only ceremonial but
superstitious, and therefore more criminal than moral.

10 It is singular that our modern Pharisees continue the custom
of fasting twice a week, on Wednesday and Friday. This is not so
monstrous as pretending to do what "God manifest in the flesh"
alone could do--to fast for forty consecutive days.--Ed.

11 God heareth the heart, without the mouth; but never heareth
the mouth acceptably, without the heart. (1 Sam 1:13,15) Puritan
Saying.

12 To such poor deceived souls, our Lord's words are extremely
applicable; "If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness!" If poor blind sinners are, through
the ignorance of their minds, fully persuaded that the destructive
way in which they walk is the road to true happiness, how dangerous
is their error, and how deplorable the consequences.--Ryland.

13 What home-thrusts are here! The two-edged sword of the Spirit,
wielded by such a man, pierces--divides--lays bare every refuge
of lies to which poor souls vainly fly for succour. It is a solemn
and most important subject. May every reader have grace given him
to weigh his hopes of heaven in the balances of divine unerring
truth.--Ed.

14 Those who plead for mercy, as the reward of their own righteousness,
are guilty of gross absurdity. They may claim to employ the mercy
which they have earned: why plead with the God of justice for that
to which they consider themselves in justice entitled? God will
give to all that to which they are entitled, without being sued
for their earnings.--Ed.

15 "Points and pantables"; quibbles and quirks. "With periods,
points, and tropes, he slurs his crimes; He robb'd not, but he
borrowed from the poor."--Dryden.

"Pantable," from pantoufle, a slipper. To stand upon his pantables,
was a contemptuous mode of speech, to express a very dishonourable
man's "standing upon his honour," which could so easily be slipped
from under him. "What pride is equal to the pope's in making
kings kiss his pantables." Sir E. Sandys. "He standeth upon his
pantables, and regardeth greatly his reputation." Saker's Character
of a Fraudulent Fellow. Bunyan was peculiarly happy in his use of
popular and proverbial expressions.--Ed.

16 "Meddle nor make," to interfere with matters that do not concern
us.

"I think it no sin, to sleep in a whole skin, So I neither meddle
nor make."--Old Play.

"He that will meddle with all things, may go shoe the goslings."
"I'll neither meddle nor make, said Bill Heaps, when he spill'd
the butter milk." Old Proverbs.--Ed.

17 The accurate knowledge of Bunyan as to the meaning of law terms
is very surprising, and proves him to have been an apt scholar.
A caveat is a caution not to admit a will that may injure some
other party.--Ed.

18 In this country the introduction of earthenware plates has
driven the less cleanly wooden plate, called a trencher, entirely
out of use.--Ed.

19 Sin-sick souls alone seek the Great Physician, and are the
proper subjects of Christ's healing power. Pride and unbelief bar
the door of mercy and grace; and if not subdued by the blood of
the cross, will ruin the soul.--Ryland.

20 "Thou art besides the saddle."

"I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting
ambition; which o'erleaps itself, And falls on the other.---"
Macbeth.

A proud ecclesiastic requested one of his devotees to give him a
leg on mounting his horse, which he did so heartily as to throw
him to the other side of the saddle, and broke his neck.--Ed.

21 "For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all" (James 2:10).

22 When we had no righteousness of our own to cover us, he put
on us naked beggars that rich robe, the righteousness of Christ.
Though black in ourselves, we are comely in Christ's comeliness;
but we never live upon his righteousness, only as we see none in
ourselves.--Ryland.

23 "Sweeting," an obsolete term for a sweet apple.--Ed.

24 This whole paragraph is omitted from all editions subsequent
to 1688, when the author died. It is the practical illustration
of his whole theory. By their fruit ye shall know them; the fruit
does not make them what they are by nature and sin or by grace and
righteousness. The rebuke of the Saviour, Matthew 15:16, falls
heavily on the man who rejected this paragraph.--Ed.

25 Abel possessed righteousness before his offering, which influenced
him to make this acceptable sacrifice.--Ed.

26 "Then was I most distressed with blasphemies, if I have been
hearing the word, then uncleanness, blasphemies, and despair would
hold me as captive." "I blessed the condition of the dog and toad,
and counted their state far better than this sate of mine."--Grace
Abounding.

27 Many are the devices of Satan to keep souls from Christ. The
world and the flesh are his grand instruments of seduction, while
his temptations and snares drown them in despair. Their wisdom
is to resist manfully by faith in the serpent-bruiser, Jesus. He
will consummate his victories by a glorious triumph over all the
powers of hell and darkness.--Ryland.

28 "A sweeting tree," a sweet apple, and not a crab apple tree.--Ed.

29 As the disobedience of the first Adam is imputed to all his
natural posterity, and brings death upon all; so the righteousness
of the second Adam is imputed to all his spiritual progeny, to obtain
life for them. As the carnal Adam, lost original righteousness,
derives a corrupt nature to all his descendants; so the spiritual
Adam, by his obedience, conveys a vital efficacy of grace to us.
The same Spirit of holiness which anointed our Redeemer doth quicken
all his race, that as they have borne the image of the earthly,
THEY may henceforth bear the image of the heavenly Adam.--Ryland.

30 "Debrorous," probably a misprint for "dolorous," sorrowful or
dismal.

"Through many a dark and dreary vale They passed, and many a region
dolorous."--Milton.

31 "Make an O yes," alluding to the form of proclamation at sessions
of the peace--"Oyer," the French for "Hear," now corrupted to "O
yes."--Ed.

32 "Boot," profit or advantage.--Ed.

33 The mercy of God has not only a quick eye to spy out a penitent,
but a swift foot to run and embrace him. What infinite condescension!
God the Father is said to "run, fall on the neck of, and kiss"
the sinner, whom he has by his Spirit inclined to sue for mercy
and peace, which, being obtained, he will withhold from him no
manner of thing that is good.--Ryland.

34 The pillory, to which allusion is here made, was a cruel mode
of punishment, now out of date. In earlier times, the ears were
nailed to the wood, and after an hour's anguish were cut off, and
the nose and cheeks slit; thus were treated Leighton and other holy
men. In later days, the victims were subjected to the brutality
of a mob, and sometimes excited by factious men.

"Tell us who 'tis upon the ridge stands there So full of fault,
and yet so void of fear; And from the paper in his hat Let all
mankind be told for what."--Defoe.

35 "Next," nighest or nearest. This sentence is highly poetical,
as much or more so as any in the writings of the most cultivated
scholars.--Ed.

36 A humbling view of our sinful selves is manifested to the soul
by the Word and Spirit of God. The gospel of Jesus Christ has all
the properties of a great and true light; it has a piercing power
and penetrating virtue; it enters the darkest recesses of the soul,
and detects the errors of men's judgment, as well as discovers
the enormities of their lives.--Ryland.

37 This sentence is peculiarly striking, and is very illustrative
of Bunyan's homely, cutting, faithful phraseology.--Ed.

38 The newly awakened soul, beholding itself in the glass of the
law, is shocked at its own deformity. Sin is truly odious, and an
intolerable burthen. So felt the royal penitent when he cried, "My
flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy judgments."
God's indignation at sin must be felt on this side the grave,
in the conscience of the sinner, if ever he hopes to escape the
dreadful punishment of it in the world to come. But blessed be
God, the blood of atonement is a sovereign balsam for sick and
wounded souls, and is abundantly efficacious for procuring pardon,
peace, and reconciliation by the application of the eternal
Spirit.--Ryland.

39 These humbling words, being too rough for ears polite, have
been omitted from all the editions of this book published since
the author's death, except the fifth, 1702.--Ed.

40 A simple-hearted man, at a prayer meeting, used the words,
"Incline our hearts to cast our bread upon the waters, that we may
find it after many days." Upon leaving the prayer meeting, while
crossing a bridge, a youth said to him, "If you were to throw a
loaf into the river, what good would it be even if you did find
it after many days"; to which his elder replied, "Oh, it is a
scripture expression, though I do not know its meaning"!!! This
happened to the editor forty-five years ago, before Sunday schools
and the Tract Society had spread their flood of scriptural knowledge
over the kingdom.--Ed.

41 This is variously interpreted, but may it not mean an ancient
mode of mocking, now called taking a sight?--Ed.

42 "Blandation," a piece of flattery. "They flattered the Bishop
of Ely with this blandation."--Camden.

***

A DEFENCE OF THE DOCTRINE OF JUSTIFICATION, BY FAITH IN JESUS
CHRIST;

SHEWING,

TRUE GOSPEL-HOLINESS FLOWS FROM THENCE; OR, MR. FOWLER'S PRETENDED
DESIGN OF CHRISTIANITY, PROVED TO BE NOTHING MORE THAN TO TRAMPLE
UNDER FOOT THE BLOOD OF THE SON OF GOD; AND THE IDOLIZING OF MAN'S
OWN RIGHTEOUSNESS

AS ALSO,

HOW WHILE HE PRETENDS TO BE A MINISTER OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
HE OVERTHROWETH THE WHOLESOME DOCTRINE CONTAINED IN THE 10TH,
11TH, AND 13TH, OF THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES OF THE SAME, AND THAT
HE FALLETH IN WITH THE QUAKER AND ROMANIST, AGAINST THEM.

BY JOHN BUNYAN

'Disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious.'--1
Peter 2:4

Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle, without
Temple Bar, 1672.

EDITOR'S ADVERTISEMENT.

This is one of the least known but most deeply interesting productions
of John Bunyan. It has never been reprinted in a separate form;
and once only in any edition of his works--that with notes, by
Mason and Ryland, and then with great carelessness, the errata
remaining uncorrected, and one leaf being entirely omitted. This
treatise was published to counteract the pernicious errors in a
very popular volume called 'The Design of Christianity, by Edward
Fowler, minister of God's Word at Northill, in Bedfordshire. Printed
by the authority of the Bishop of London, April 17th, 1671'; an
octavo volume of 308 pages. The whole object proposed by Mr. Fowler
was to shew, that Christianity is intended merely to restore man
to the original state which he enjoyed before the fall.

Bunyan was at that time suffering his tedious imprisonment for
conscience sake in Bedford jail; and having refused to expatriate
himself, was in daily fear lest his cruel sentence, 'you must
stretch by the neck' for refusing to attend the church service,
should be carried into execution.

The fame of Fowler's gross perversion of the design of Christ's
gospel reached Bunyan in prison, and its popularity grieved his
spirit. At length, on the 13th of the 11th Month (February), a
copy of the book was brought to him; and in the almost incredible
space of forty-two short days, on the 27th of the 12th Month
(March) 1671-2, he had fully analysed 'The Design,' exposed the
sophistry, and scripturally answered the gross errors which abound
in every page of this learned and subtle piece of casuistry.

The display of Latin and Greek quotations from the heathens and
fathers, those thunderbolts of scholastic warfare, dwindled into
mere pop-gun weapons before the sword of the Spirit, which puts all
such rabble to utter rout. Never was the homely proverb of Cobbler
Howe more fully exemplified, than in this triumphant answer to the
subtilities of a man deeply schooled in all human acquirements, by
an unlettered mechanic, whose knowledge was drawn from one book,
the inspired volume:--

'The Spirit's teaching in a cobbler's shop, Doth Oxford and Cambridge
o'ertop.'

The Babel building of the learned clergyman could not withstand
the attack of one who was armed with such irresistible weapons. His
words burn 'like a fire,' and consume the wood, hay and stubble;
while they fell with overpowering weight, as 'a hammer that
breaketh the rock in pieces' (Jer 23:29). So cunningly was 'the
design' constructed, that nothing but the fire and hammer of
God's word could have demolished it. Armed with such weapons, he
fearlessly from his dungeon made the attack; and, encouraged by
the Spirit which animated the prophet, he was not 'dismayed at
their faces,' but became as 'a defenced city, and an iron pillar,
and brazen walls against the whole land' (Jer 1:48).

Such internal and powerful support encouraged Bunyan to use the
greatest plainness of speech. He as fully aware of his danger,
and of the great influence of Mr. Fowler, but he had counted the
cost of plain honest dealing, and was undaunted by the perils which
surrounded him. With noble bearing, worthy the descendant of the
apostles, he declares, 'As for your subtle and close incensing THE
POWER to persecute Nonconformists, know that we are willing, God
assisting, to overcome you with truth and patience; not sticking
to sacrifice our lives, and dearest concerns in a faithful
witness-bearing.' 'Wherefore, sir, laying aside all fear of men,
not regarding what you may procure to be inflicted upon me, for
this my plain dealing with you, I tell you again, that you are
one of them that have closely, privily, and devilishly, by your
book, turned the grace of our God into a lascivious doctrine.'
Mr. Fowler's opinions were not only contrary to scripture, but to
that which some esteem a more heinous offence, they opposed the
thirty-nine articles; and the result was that Bunyan, who vindicated
the scriptures and those articles, was kept in prison, while the
clergyman who opposed them was soon after consecrated Bishop of
Gloucester! It may lead some simple readers to wonder how it could
be, that state religion thus made a mockery of itself. The reason
is perfectly obvious; Fowler's religion was that of a statesman,
which may be comprised in one word, expediency; and the man who
could publish as truth, that religion consists in obeying the
orders made therein by the state, deserved the primacy of the
united churches of England and Ireland. His words are, speaking
of religious observances, 'Whatsoever of such are commended by
the custom of the places we live in, or commanded by superiors,
or made by any circumstance convenient to be done; our Christian
liberty consists in this, that we have leave to do them. And,
indeed, it is so far from being a sin, that it would be so to
refuse so to do.' Could the state have selected a fitter tool for
their purposes?

Mr. Fowler is somewhat inconsistent with regard to persecution;
in p. 266 he says, 'As for factious hypocrite, they would be with
ease supprest'; in p. 262 he describes these factious hypocrites,
'Such as preach up free grace,--laying hold on Christ's righteousness
and renouncing our own righteousness.' Such are to be suppressed,
but for Roman catholics 'imposing their own sense upon the word
of God, and their persecuting, burning, and damning men for not
subscribing to theirs as to God's word can be no better than an
act of devilish pride and barbarous cruelty,' p. 247. Does not
the same pride and cruelty apply equally to the church of Bonner
for burning Latimer, of Fowler, for the imprisonment of Bunyan;
and of Philpot, for dragging his brother, Shore, from his family,
and shutting him up in Exeter jail?

The admirers of Bunyan will feel surprised at his strictures upon
persons calling themselves Quakers. In these severe remarks he
does not refer to the Society of Friends; but to some unworthy
individuals who assumed the name of Quakers. They will be equally
surprised at his freedom of speech with one who he considered to
be an enemy to his Lord. He calls Mr. Fowler 'a brutish, beastly
man,' 'this thief,' 'a blasphemer,' 'horribly wicked,' 'a learned
ignorant Nicodemus,' 'one that would fling heaven's gates off the
hinges,' 'a bat,' 'an angel of darkness.' Such epithets sound
strangely in our more refined age; but they were then considered
essential to faithful dealing. The Bishop in his reply, called
'Dirt wiped off,' beat the tinker in abusive language; he calls
Bunyan 'A wretched scribbler,' 'grossly ignorant,' 'most unchristian
and wicked,' 'a piece of proud folly,' 'so very dirty a creature
that he disdains to dirt his fingers with him,' 'Bunyan can no
more disgrace him than a rude creature can eclipse the moon by
barking at her; or make palaces contemptible by lifting up their
legs against them,' 'a most black-mouthed calumniator,' 'infamous
in Bedford for a pestilent schismatic,' and with a heart full
of venom he called upon his majesty not to let such a firebrand,
impudent, malicious schismatic to enjoy toleration, or go unpunished,
lest he should subvert all government. Bunyan had then suffered
nearly twelve years' incarceration in a miserable jail, and was
more zealous and intrepid than ever: and yet this learned fanatic
would have added to his privations, because he could not resist the
arrows of truth with which this poor prisoner for Christ assailed
him, drawn all burning from the furnace of God's holy word.

Bunyan's views of the kingly office of Christ are very striking:
not only is he king over the church requiring personal obedience,
but over the universe for the benefit of believers. 'Christ is as
well a Lord for us, as to, or over us; and it highly concerneth
the soul--when it believeth in, or trusteth to, the righteousness
of Christ, for justification with God--to see that this righteousness
lords it over death and sin, and the devil and hell for us.' 'He
led captivity captive, that is, carried them prisoners, whose
prisoners we were: He rode to heaven in triumph, having in chains
the foes of believers.'

This compendious treatise is upon a most important subject, and
detects dangerous errors enveloped in most insinuating sophistry.
In preparing this edition for the press, the text has been carefully
collated with the original, which is in the editor's possession.
The quotations have been verified; those from Fowler by the first
edition of his 'Design of Christianity,' 1671. The extracts from
'Penn's Sandy Foundation,' by the second edition, in the Friends'
library, Devonshire House. Those from Campian have not been
discovered; the author's being confined at Bedford, while his book
was printing in London, occasioned numerous typographical errors
which have been corrected, and all the obsolete words explained.

To assist the reader, a few leading words have been introduced in
italics, and between brackets, to distinguish them from the text.

GEORGE OFFOR.



A PREMONITION TO THE READER

GENTLE READER,

That thou mayest not be tired with longing to know what errors, and
doctrines destructive to Christianity, Mr. Fowler in his feigned
design of Christianity, hath presented the world withal; and that
thou mayest even in the entry, see that which more fully is shewn
in the house: namely, of the contradiction that is in his book, to
the wholesome doctrine of the church of England, while he stands
a minister of the same, I have thought convenient, instead of an
epistle, to present thee with those doctrines contained in his;
and that are refuted by the book that thou hast in thy hand.
The which also, I hope, will be a sufficient apology for this my
undertaking.

His Doctrines are these:

1. That the first principles of morals, those first written in
men's hearts, are the essentials, the indispensable, and fundamental
points or doctrines of the gospel (p. 8, 281, 282). 2. That these
first principles, are to be followed, principally, as they are
made known to us, by the dictates of human nature: and that this
obedience is the first, and best sort of obedience, we Christians
can perform (p. 8, 9, 10). 3. That there is such a thing as
a soundness of soul; and the purity of human nature in the world
(p. 6). 4. That the law, in the first principles of it, is far
beyond, and more obliging on the hearts of Christians, than is,
that of coming to God by Christ (p. 7-10). 5. That the precept
of coming to God by Christ, &c., is in its own nature, a thing
indifferent, and absolutely considered neither good nor evil (p.
7, 8, 9). 6. That Christ's great errand, in coming into the world,
was to put us again in possession of the holiness we had lost (p.
12). 7. That John the Baptist, the Angel that was sent to Zacharias,
and Mary, preached this doctrine, and so also did Malachi the
prophet (p. 13). 8. That Christ by saving us from sin, is meant,
not first, his saving us from the punishment, but from the filth,
and from the punishment, as a consequence of that (p. 14, 15). 9.
That Christ's work, when he was come, was to establish ONLY an
inward real righteousness (p. 16). 10. That Christ's fulfilling
the law FOR US, was by giving more perfect, and lighter instances
of moral duties, than were before expressly given (p. 17). 11. That
Christ's doctrine, life, actions, miracles, death, resurrection,
ascension, and coming again to judgment, is all preached to establish
us in this righteousness (chap. 2-8). 12. That it is not possible
a wicked man should have God's pardon (p. 119). 13. That it is
impossible Christ's righteousness should be imputed to an unrighteous
man (p. 120). 14. And that if it were, he boldly affirms, it
would signify as little to his happiness, while he continueth so,
as would a gorgeous and splendid garment, to one that is almost
starved (p. 120). 15. For God to justify a wicked man,[1] &c.,
would far more disparage his justice and holiness, than advance
his grace and kindness (p. 130). 16. He saith, men are not capable
of God's pardoning grace, till they have truly repented them of
all their sins (p. 130). 17. The devils, saith he, have a large
measure of these attributes of God; as his power, knowledge, &c.[2]
(p. 124). 18. That Christ did himself perform, as our example,
whatever he required of us to do; yea, that he trod himself EVERY
step of our way to heaven (p. 148). 19. The salvation of Christ,
first, consists in curing our wounds (our filth) and secondarily,
in freeing us from the smart (p. 216). 20. That pardon doth not
so much consist in remission, as in healing; [to wit, our filth,]
(p. 216). 21. Faith justifieth, as it includeth true holiness in
the nature of it; it justifieth AS it doth so (p. 221). 22. That
faith which entitles a sinner to so high a privilege as that of
justification, must needs be such as complieth with all the
purposes of Christ's coming into the world, &c. And it is no less
necessary that it should justify as it doth this (p. 222). 23. He
wonders that any worthy man should be so difficultly persuaded,
to embrace THIS account of justifying faith (p. 222). 24. There
can be no pretence for a man, to think that faith should be the
condition or instrument of justification, as it complieth with,
only the precept of relying on Christ's merits for the obtaining of
it (p. 223). 25. It is, saith he, as clear as the sun at noon-day,
that obedience to the other precepts must go before obedience
to this (p. 223). 26. He shall be his Apollo, that can give
him a sufficient reason, why justifying faith should consist in
recumbence[3] and reliance on Christ's merits for the pardon of
sin[4] (p. 224). 27. He will take the boldness to tell those who
are displeased with this account of justifying faith, that in his
opinion it is impossible they should ONCE think of any other (p.
225). 28. The imputation of Christ's righteousness, consisteth in
dealing with sincerely righteous persons, as if they were perfectly
so, &c. (p. 225). 29. The grand intent of the gospel is, to make us
partakers of inward real righteousness; and it is but secondary,
that we should be accepted as before (p. 226). 30. It is not
possible (he saith) that any other notion of this doctrine should
have truth in it (p. 226). 31. Whatsoever is commended by the
customs of the place we live in, or commanded by superiors, or made
by ANY circumstance convenient to be done, our Christian liberty
consists in this that we have leave to do them (p. 242). 31. For
our refusing to comply with these, can hardly proceed from any
thing, than a proud affectation of singularity, or at best from
superstitious scrupluosity (p. 242). 33. Those ministers hinder the
design of Christianity, that preach up free grace, and Christian
privileges, OTHER WAYS than as motives to obedience, and that
scarce ever insist upon any other duties than those of believing,
laying hold of Christ's righteousness, applying the promises, &c.
(p. 262). 34. But to make the Christian duties to consist either
wholly or mostly in these, &c., is the way effectually to harden
hypocrites (p. 262). 35. Those ministers do nothing less than promote
the design of Christianity, that are never in their element, but
when they are talking of the irrespectiveness of God's decrees,
the absolute [ness of his] promises, the utter disability, and
perfect impotence of natural men, to do any thing towards their
own conversion (p. 262). 36. He is the only child of Abraham, who
in the purity of his heart obeyeth those substantial laws, that
are by God imposed upon him (p. 283). 37. There is NO duty more
affectionately commanded in the gospel, than that of almsgiving
(p. 284). 38. It is impossible we should not have the design of
Christianity accomplished in us, &c., if we make our Saviour's
most excellent life, the pattern of our lives (p. 296). 39. To
do well is better than believing (p. 299). 40. To be imitators of
Christ's righteousness, even of the righteousness we should rely
on, is counted by Mr. Fowler, more noble, than to rely thereon,
or trust thereto (p. 300).

READER,

I have given thee here but a taste of these things; and by my book
but a brief reply to the errors that he by his hath divulged to
the world: Ay, though many more are by me reflected than the forty
thou are here presented with.

God give thee eyes to see, and an heart to shun and escape all
these things that may yet come to pass, for hurt, and to stand
before the Son of Man.

Thus hoping that this short taste may make Mr. Fowler ashamed, and
thee receive satisfaction, touching the truth and state of this
man's spirit and principles; I rest,

Thine to serve thee in the gospel of Christ,

J. BUNYAN From Prison, the 27th of the 12th Month, 1671. [27th
March, 1672]


FOOTNOTES:

1. Fowler's words, in place of, &c., are 'while he continues so
(if it were possible for God to do it).'

2. Holiness is excepted!!

3. 'Recumbence,' depending upon.

4. Fowler adds, 'and not also in his power for the mortification
of it.'



A DEFENCE OF THE DOCTRINE OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST;

PROVING

THAT GOSPEL-HOLINESS FLOWS FROM THENCE.

SIR,

Having heard of your book, entitled, The Design of Christianity;
and that in it was contained such principles as gave just offence
to Christian ears; I was desirous of a view thereof, that from my
sight of things I might be the better able to judge. But I could
not obtain it till the 13th of this 11th month, which was too
soon for you, Sir, a pretended minister of the word, so vilely to
expose to public view the rottenness of your heart in principles
diametrically opposite to the simplicity of the gospel of Christ.
And had it not been for this consideration, that it is not too
late to oppose open blasphemy (such as endangereth the souls of
thousands) I had cast by this answer, as a thing out of season.

Two things are the design of your book.

1. To assert and justify a thing which you call inward, real
righteousness and holiness.

2. To prove, That the whole, the grand, the only, and ultimate design
of the gospel of Christ, is to begin and perfect this righteousness.

Into the truth, or untruth, of both these, as briefly as I may,
I shall at this time inquire.

First, Therefore, a little to examine the nature of your holiness
and righteousness, as yourself hath described the same.

'It is (say you) so sound a complexion of soul, as maintains in
life and vigour, whatsoever is essential to it, and suffereth not
anything unnatural to mix with that which is so; by the force and
power whereof a man is enabled to behave himself as [becometh]
a creature indued with a principle of reason, keeps his supreme
faculty in its throne, brings into due subjection all his inferior
ones, his sensual imagination, his brutish passions and affections.'

You add farther, 'It is the purity of the human nature, engaging
those in whom it resides, to demean themselves suitably in that
state in which God hath placed them, and not to act disbecomingly
in any condition, circumstance or relation.'

You say, moreover, 'It is a divine, or God-like nature, causing
an hearty approbation of, and an affectionate compliance with the
eternal laws of righteousness; and a behaviour agreeable to the
essential, and immutable differences of good and evil' (p. 6).

Farther, You call it a principle or habit of soul, 'originally
dictates of human nature' (p.8).

'A disposition and temper of the inward man, as powerfully inclines
it to regard, and attend to; affectionately to embrace and adhere
to; to be actuated by, and under the government of, all those [good]
practical principles, that are made known either by revelation,
nature, or the use of reason' (p. 11). Which in conclusion you
call that holiness which already we have lost (p. 12).

Thus, Sir, is your holiness, by you described; which holiness
you aver is that, which is the great and only design of Christ to
promote both by his life and glorious gospel.

To take therefore your description in pieces, if happily there
may be found ought, but naught therein.

1. 'It is (say you) an healthful complexion of soul, the purity
of the human nature,' &c.

Ans. These are but words; there is no such thing as the purity of
our nature, abstract and distinct from the sinful pollution that
dwelleth in us (Rom 7:24). It is true, a man may talk of, and by
argument distinguish between nature and sin; but that there is
such a principle in man (since Adam's fall) a principle by which
he may act, or that Christ's whole gospel-design is, the helping
forward such a principle, is altogether without scripture
or reason. There is no man by nature, that hath any soundness in
him (Isa 1:6), no, neither in soul or body; his understanding is
darkened, his mind and conscience is defiled (Titus 1:15), his
will is perverted and obstinate (Eph 4:18). 'There is no judgment
in his goings' (Isa 59:6-10). Where now is the sound and healthful
complexion of soul? Let the best come to the best, when we have
mustered up all the excellences of the soul of man, as man, shall
nought we find there, but the lame, the blind, the defiled, the
obstinate and misled faculties thereof. And never think to evade
me by saying, the graces of the Spirit of God are pure: for with
them you have nothing to do; your doctrine is of the sound complexion
of soul, the purity of the human nature, a habit of soul, and the
holiness we lost in Adam, things a great way off from the spirit
of grace, or the gracious workings of the spirit. You talk indeed
of a divine or godlike nature,[1] but this is still the same with
your pure human nature, or with your sound complexion, or habit
of soul; and so must either respect man, as he was created in the
image or likeness of God, or else you have palpable contradiction in
this your description. But it must be concluded, that the divine
nature you talk of, is that, and no other than the dictates of the
human nature, or your feigned purity thereof; because you make it
by your words the self same; it is the purity of the human nature,
it is a divine or Godlike nature.

2. But you proceed to tell us of a degree, it is so sound and
healthful a complexion or temperature of the faculties, qualities,
or virtues of soul, 'as maintains in life and vigour whatsoever
is essential to it, and suffereth not anything unnatural to mix
with that which is so.'[2]

Ans. If, as was said before, there is no soundness of soul in
man, as man, and no such thing as a purity of our nature, abstract
from that which is sin; then where shall we find so healthful
a complexion, or temperature of soul, as to maintain in life and
vigour whatsoever is essential to it, and that suffereth not any
thing unnatural to mix with that which is so?

But let us take Paul's definition of a man; 'There is none righteous,
no, not one: there is none that understandeth, there is none that
seeketh after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are
together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no,
not one. Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues
they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips:
whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: their feet are swift
to shed blood: destruction and misery are in their ways: and the
way of peace have they not known: there is no fear of God before
their eyes' (Rom 3). I the rather give you this of Paul, than any
of my own; because it is the soundest complexion of soul, that
the Holy Ghost himself could draw. Here is now no purity of the
human nature, nor such sound complexion of soul as can keep itself
from mixing with that which is contrary to itself. And note, that
this is the state of all men, and that as they stand in themselves
before God: wherefore together, even altogether, all the men in
the world, take them in their most pure naturals, or with all the
purity of humanity, which they can make, and together, they still
will be unprofitable, and so much come short of doing good, 'that
every mouth might be stopped, and all the world become guilty
before God' (v 19).[3]

3. But proceeding, you say, that this complexion is so forcible as
to 'keep his supreme faculty (I suppose you mean the conscience)
in its throne, (and that) brings into due subjection all his inferior
ones, (as namely) his sensual imagination, brutish passions and
affections.'[4]

Ans. These words suppose that it is within the power of a man's
own soul, always to keep sin out of itself, and so guilt out of
the conscience; albeit the scripture saith, that both the mind
and it are defiled with the filth of sin, in all whoever do not
believe the gospel, with which belief this description meddleth
not (Titus 1:15).

They suppose that this conscience is perfectly clear and light,
when the scriptures say they have the understanding darkened;
yea and farther, in despite of these your sayings of the sound
complexion of soul, of the purity of human nature, and of this
supreme faculty, the scriptures teach, that man in his best estate
is altogether vanity, that they are darkness and night, &c. (Eph
4:18,19; 1 Thess 5; Psa 39:5).

'Yea, (say you) this sound complexion brings into due subjection
all his inferior ones.'[5]

Ans. Here seems to be a contradiction to the former part of this
description, yea, to the nature of the soul itself; for you say
before, it suffereth not any thing unnatural to mix itself therewith,
when yet here you seem to suggest that part, I say, even part of
itself is disobedient and rebellious, 'it brings into subjection
all his inferior ones.'

'It brings into due subjection.'

Ans. Due subjection is such as is everlasting, universal, perfect
in nature, kind, and manner, such as the most righteous, perfect,
comprehensive law, or commandment cannot object against, or find
fault therewith. Here's a soul! here's a pure human nature! here
are pure dictates of a brutish beastly man, that neither knows
himself nor one title of the word of God. But 'There is a generation
that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their
filthiness' (Prov 30:12).

'It is the purity of the human nature, engaging those in whom it
resides,' &c.[6]

Ans. That is, verily in none at all; for there is no such thing
in any man in this world, as a purity of human nature: 'we are all
as an unclean thing' (Isa 64:6) and 'Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean? not one' (Job 14:4). Again,

'What is man, that he should be clean? or he which is born of
a woman, that he should be righteous?' (Job 15:14). These are
therefore expressions without the testimony of the word, arising
from your own phantasy.

'It is a divine, or Godlike nature.'[7]

Ans. This you seem also to fetch from the similitude or likeness
of God that was in us at our first creation, before we sinned;
but that similitude being at best but created, and since most
unspeakably defiled, defaced and polluted with sin; there is
now, no not in the best of men, as men, any sinless likeness, and
similitude of God to be found, no such petty divine, or Godlike
nature to be found, as you imagine.

But having thus stated your holiness in its nature and essence,
you come in the next place to tell us, under what considerations
it moveth a person to act, also by what rules and laws it squareth
its acts and doings.

FIRST, By or under what considerations it acts, and these you
scatter here and there in your description of holiness, under these
heads. I. To act 'as becomes a creature endued with a principle
of reason,' eyeing the state or place in which God hath set him;
approving of, affecting and complying with the eternal laws of
righteousness (p. 6), which eternal laws in page 8 you call 'divine
moral laws,' those that were first written in the hearts of men,
'and originally dictates of human nature,' &c. II. 'To do these,
from truly generous motives and principles' (p. 7). Such as these,
1. Because 'it is most highly becoming all reasonable creatures
(you might also have added, and those unreasonable) to obey God in
everything; (within their spheres) and as much disbecoming them,
to disobey him' (p. 8). 2. 'Because it is a base thing to do
unjustly' (p. 11).

Now a little to touch upon all these, and then to proceed to what
is behind.

I. To act and do the things of the moral law, but as 'creatures
endued with a principle of reason,' is but to do things in our
sphere as men, as the beast, the hog or horse doth things in his,
as a beast; which is at best, if it could be attained, to act but
as pure naturals, which state of man is of at infinite distance
from that, in which it is by God expected the man must act, that
doth ought that is pleasing in his sight. For,

1. The qualification and consideration by you propounded, is that
which is in all men, in men simply as men, they being reasonable
creatures, and somewhat, though but somewhat capable of acting as
such.

2. This qualification is not only in, but of men; reason is of the
man himself, even that which is as essential to him, as is that
of his being created or made.

3. The law also, which you call divine, moral, and eternal, is
that which is naturally seated in the heart, and as you yourself
express it, is originally the dictates of human nature, or that
which mankind doth naturally assent to (p. 11).

Now I say, that a man cannot by these principles, and these
qualifications, please the God of heaven, is apparent. (1.) Because
none of these are faith, 'But without faith it is impossible to
please him' (Heb 11:6). (2.) Because none of these are of the Holy
Ghost, but there is nothing accepted of God, under a New Testament
consideration, but those which are the fruits of the Spirit (Gal
5:22-24). (3.) The man and principles you have stated, may be
such as are utterly ignorant of Jesus Christ, and of all his New
Testament things, as such: 'But the natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God: [the things of his New Testament] for
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned' (1 Col 2:14). (4.) Your qualifications
and considerations, know nothing at all of the adoption of sons,
and of our acting and doing our duty as such. You only content
yourself to rest within the confines of the human nature, acts
of reason, as men or creatures only, or in their supposed pure,
natural principles.

And Sir, a little by way of digression; I will tell you also of
our truly Christian righteousness, both as to its original or
first principle; and also how, or under what capacity, it puts
the person that is acted by it.

First, The principle which is laid within us, it is not the purity
of the human nature, but of the Holy Ghost itself, which we have
of God received, by believing in the Son of God, a principle as
far above yours of humanity, as is the heavens above the earth;
yours being but like those of the first Adam, but ours truly those
of the second (1 Col 6:19). 'As is the earthy, such are they also
that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that
are heavenly' (1 Cor 15:48).

Now whosoever hath not this principle, although he be a creature,
and also have the dictates of the human nature, yea, and also
follows them, yet he is not Christ's: 'If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his' (Rom 8:9). Thus therefore is the
Christian principle another from, and far above, your heathenish
Pagan one. By this Spirit is the Christian qualified with principles,
not natural, but spiritual, such as faith, hope, joy, peace, &c.
all which are the fruits of the revelation of the forgiveness of
sins, freely by grace (Gal 5:25), 'through the redemption that
is in Jesus Christ' (Rom 3:24). In this spirit and faith we walk,
by this spirit we are led (Rom 8:14), even into the joy and peace
of the New Testament of our Lord; wherefore our holy actions are
the fruits of righteousness, that is by Jesus Christ, not by our
human nature, or the purity of it in us; yea, they are the fruits
of the Spirit of God, the qualifications that attend the new
covenant, and those that by the work of regeneration are brought
within the bounds and privileges thereof. Wherefore,

Second, The capacity that we are in, who act and do from the heavenly
principle; it is that of sons, the sons of God by adoption, as
the apostle said, 'Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father' (Gal
4:6). And again, 'As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the sons of God' (Rom 8:14). This is a far other than is your
human description of acting as a creature, endued with a principle
of reason; for here is a man acts as a son, endued with the Holy
Spirit of God, who hath, before the world was, predestinated him
to this estate, by Jesus Christ, to himself (Eph 1:4, 4:6). As a
son therefore, the Christian acts and does, because he is endued
with that high and heavenly principle mentioned before; by which
principle this man hath received a new heart, a new spirit, a new
understanding, a good conscience, so made by 'faith in the blood of
the Lord Jesus' (Heb 10). Thus being made again anew and another
man, he acts from a new and another principle than yours; a
principle as far beyond and above you, as is a man above a brute,
and as is grace above nature (2 Col 5:14-16).

Third, As the Christian acts and does from a better principle,
and under a better capacity or consideration than that you have
described; so (to allude to your own notion) the first principles
by which they receive this spirit and adoption, are not those
principles of morals, or those originally dictates of human nature;
but it is through the hearing of faith (Gal 3:1-3), by which we
understand, that the Son of God became a man, died for our sins,
hath saved us from the curse of God, and accounted us to be the
righteousness of God in him; this being heard with the gospel,
and a New Testament hearing, the Holy Ghost forthwith possesseth
us, by the glorious working whereof we are helped, through the
Son, to call the God of heaven, our Father.

Now thus being made free from sin, by the only faith of Jesus
Christ, 'we have our fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life' (Rom 6:22).

And here come in those reasonable conclusions, which you would
make the very radicals of Christianity, they being only remote,
and after conclusions, drawn from the fore-mentioned mercy of God,
viz., from predestination, calling, adoption, and justification
by Christ's blood, while we in ourselves are sinners. I say these
are the things which Paul endeavoured to provoke the Romans,
Philippians, and Colossians, to an holy conversation by.

To the Romans, 'I beseech you therefore,' saith he, 'by the mercies
of God, (What mercies? Why those of election, redemption, calling,
justification, and adoption, mentioned in the foregoing chapters)
that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
unto God, which is your reasonable service' (Rom 12:1).

To the Philippians, 'If there be therefore any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like
minded' (Phil 2:1,2).

To the Colossians, 'If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand
of God; set your affection on things above, not on things on the
earth; for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory' (Col 3:1-4). Now mark; mortify therefore,
therefore! wherefore? why, because they were risen with Christ;
because they should appear at the end of this world with Christ
himself in glory; therefore mortify the deeds of the body, or our
members that are upon the earth.

These Sir, are the motives by which we Christians act; because we
are forgiven, because we are sons, and if sons, then heirs, and
so we act; but to speak to this more anon.

Perhaps you will say I deal not fairly with you, because you treat,
as of moral, so of gospel or New Testament laws.

But to that I will answer at present, that in this description of
your holy principle, which is the foundation of your book, whether
the laws be natural or spiritual, moral or of grace, the principle
by which you do them, is no other than the principle of nature,
the dictates of the human nature; and so such as can by no means
reach the doctrines of the gospel any farther than to make a
judgment of them, by that wisdom which is 'enmity with God,' as
will farther be seen in my progress through your book.

Indeed you make mention of divine laws, and that under two heads.
1. Such as are of an indispensable and eternal obligation, as
those purely moral. 2. Such which you call positive precepts, in
themselves of an indifferent nature, and absolutely considered,
are neither good nor evil. Of those of this kind that we have under
the gospel, you say you know but three, viz., That of coming to
God by Christ, and the institutions of baptism, and the Lord's
supper.

So then, although you talk of gospel positive laws, and particularly
that of coming to God by Christ; yet those which you call first
principles of morals, are of higher concern with you, and more
indispensable by far than this, this being a thing of an indifferent
nature, and in itself absolutely considered, is neither good nor
evil; but the other is the life of the matter. But a little to
gather you up.

The morals, say you, are indispensable, and good in themselves,
but that of coming to God by Christ, a thing indifferent, and
in itself neither good nor evil. Wherefore though in this your
description, you talk of conforming to all those good and practical
principles, that are made known either by revelation, nature, or
the use of reason, yet in this your obedience you reckon coming
to God by Christ, but an act of a very indifferent nature, a thing
if done not good in itself, neither evil in itself, should a man
leave it undone; and so consequently a man may have in him the
ground and essentials of Christianity without it, may be saved,
and go to heaven without it: for this I say, whatsoever is of an
indifferent nature in itself, is not essential to the Christian
religion; but may or may not be done without the hazard of eternal
salvation; but say you, this of coming to God by Christ, is one of
the positive precepts, which are in themselves things indifferent,
and neither good nor evil: therefore not of the substance of
Christianity.

But, Sir, where learned you this new doctrine, as to reckon coming
to God by Christ, a thing of so indifferent a nature, a thing not
good in itself, but with respect to certain circumstances. Had
you said this of baptism and the Supper of the Lord, I could with
some allowance have borne your words, but to count coming to God
by Christ a thing indifferent in itself, is a blasphemy that may
not be borne by Christians, it being too high a contempt of the
blood, and too great a disgrace to the person of the Lord, the
king of glory; of which more hereafter, but to return.

II. The intent of this your description is to set before us these
two things.

(1.) What are the essentials of the rule of that holiness, which
by the gospel we are immediately obliged to, if we would be
justified in the sight of God.

(2.) What are the principles by which we act, when we do these
works aright.

1. For the first you tell us, 'they are the first principles of
morals, such as are self-evident, and therefore not capable
of being properly demonstrated; as being no less knowable, and
easily assented to, than any proposition that may be brought for
the proof of them.' Such as are self-evident or evident of themselves;
to what? To us as men that know the principles of reason, and
that are as easily assented to as any proposition; why said you
not such as may be as easily known, as we know there is a day or
night, winter and summer, or any other thing that may be brought
for the proof of them. This law therefore is none other than that
mentioned in Romans 2:14, 15 which is the law of our nature, or
that which was implanted in us in the day of our creation, and
therefore is said to be ourselves, even nature itself (1 Cor
11:14).

2. The principle, say you, by which we act, and in the strength of
which we do this law, it is the principle of reason, or a reasonable
compliance with this law written in our hearts, and originally
dictates of human nature, &c. which certain principle, say you, is
this, to count it 'most highly becoming all reasonable creatures,
to obey God in every thing; and as much disbecoming them, in any
thing to disobey him.'

The sum is; this your holiness both in root and act is not other
than what is common to all the men on earth; I mean so common
as that for the first, is in their nature, as the second is also
part of themselves, they being creatures whose prime or principal
distinction from other, consisteth more in that they are reasonable,
and such as have reason as a thing essential to them; wherefore
the excellency that you have discoursed of, is none other than
the excellency and goodness that is of this world, such as in
the first principles of it, is common to Heathens, Pagans, Turks,
Infidels: and that as evidently dictates to those that have not
heard the gospel (I mean as to the nature the good and evil)
as it doth in them that sit under the sound thereof; and is the
self-same which our late ungodly heretics the Quakers have made
such a stir to promote and exalt, only in the description thereof
you seem more ingenious than they: for whereas they erroneously
call it Christ, the light of Christ, faith, grace, hope, the spirit,
the word that is nigh, &c. you give it the names due thereto, viz.
A complexion or complication and combination of all the virtue
of the soul, the human nature, the dictates of it, the principles
of reason, such as are self-evident, than which there is nothing
mankind doth naturally assent to (p. 6-11). Only here, as I have
said, you glorify your errors also, with names and titles that
are not to be found, but in your own deluded brains: as that the
virtues of the souls can keep themselves incommixed, that there is
yet in us the purity of the humane nature, or such a disposition,
that can both by light and power give a man to see, and powerfully
incline him to, and bring him under the government of all those
good and practical principles, that are made known either by
revelation, nature, or the use of reason.

But I say, these principles thus stated by you, being the principles,
and the goodness of this world, and such as have not faith, but
the law; not the Holy Ghost, but humane nature in them; they cannot
be those which you affirm, was or is the design, the great, the
only, and ultimate design of Christ, or his gospel to promote, and
propagate in the world; neither with respect to our justification
before God from the curse; neither with respect to the workings
of his Spirit, and the faith of Jesus in our hearts, the true
gospel or evangelical holiness.

First, It is not the righteousness that justifieth us before God
from the curse; because it is that which is properly our own; and
acted and managed by principles of our own, arising originally in
the roots of it, from our own. There is the righteousness of men,
and the righteousness of God: that which is the righteousness of
men, is that which we do work from matter and principles of our
own; but that which is the righteousness of God, is that which
is wrought from matter and principles purely divine, and of the
nature of God. Again, that which is our own righteousness, is
that which is wrought in and by our own persons as men; but that
which is the righteousness of God, is that which is wrought in
and by the second person in the Trinity, as God and man in one
person; and that resideth only in that person of the Son. I speak
now of the righteousness by which we stand just before God, from
the curse of the law. Now this righteousness of ours, our own
righteousness, the apostle always opposeth to the righteousness of
God, saying, 'They going about to establish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God' (Rom
9:3). Father, This righteousness of our own, Paul counts loss
and dog's-meat, in comparison of that other, far more glorious
righteousness, which he calleth as it is in truth, the righteousness of
God (Phil 3:7-9), which as I said but now, resideth in the person
of the Son. Therefore (saith Paul) I cast away my own righteousness,
and do count it loss, and 'but dung, that I may win Christ, and be
found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith.' The righteousness therefore, that is
our own, that ariseth from matter and principles of our own (such
as that which you have described) justifieth us not before God
from the curse.

Second, The righteousness that you have described, justifieth us
not, as before, because it is the righteousness which is of the
moral law, that is, it is wrought by us, as walking in the law.
Now it mattereth not, whether you respect the law in its first
principles, or as it is revealed in the table of the ten commandments,
they are in nature but one and the same, and their substance and
matter is written in our hearts, as we are men. Now this righteousness,
the apostle casteth away, as was shewn before; 'Not having mine
own righteousness (saith he) which is of the law'; why? Because
the righteousness that saveth us from the wrath of God, is
the righteousness of God; and so a righteousness that is without
the law. 'But now the righteousness of God without the law is
manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; even the
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all
and upon all them that believe' (Rom 3:21,22). The righteousness of
God without the law; the righteousness of Christ who is naturally
God; wherefore such a righteousness as was accomplished by him that
was Lord, and the very God of the law; whose nature was infinite,
and not that which the law could command or condemn; neither was
the command of the law, the great and principal argument with him,
no, not in its first and highest principles, to do or continue to
do it; but even that which the law commanded of us, that he did,
not by the law, but by that spirit of life, that eternal spirit, and
Godhead, which was essential to his very being: He did naturally
and infinitely that which the law required of us, from higher,
and more mighty principles than the law could require of him: for
I should reckon it a piece of prodigious blasphemy to say, that the
law could command his God; the creature, his Lord and Creator: but
this Lord God, Jesus Christ, even he hath accomplished righteousness,
even righteousness that is without, that is above, higher, and
better than that of the law; and that is the righteousness that is
given to, and put upon all them that believe. Wherefore the Lord
Jesus Christ, in his most blessed life, was neither prompted to
actions of holiness, nor managed in them, by the purity of humane
nature, or those you call first principles of morals, or as he was
simply a reasonable creature; but being the natural Son of God,
truly, and essentially, eternal as the Father; by the eternal
Spirit, his Godhead, was his manhood governed, and acted, and
spirited to do and suffer. 'He through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God' (Heb 9:14); which offering respects
not only his act of dying, but also that by which he was capacitated
to die without spot in his sight; which was the infinite dignity,
and sinlessness of his person; and the perfect justice of his
actions. Now this person, thus acting, is approved of, or justified
by the law to be good: for if the righteousness of the law be
good, which law is but a creature, the righteousness of the Lord,
the God of this law, must needs be much more good; wherefore here
is the law, and its perfection swallowed up, even as the light of
a candle, or star is swallowed up by the light of the sun. Thus
then is the believer made, not the righteousness of the law, 'but
the righteousness of God in Christ' (2 Cor 5:21), because Christ
Jesus, who is the righteousness of the Christian, did walk in this
world, in, and under the law; not by legal and humane principles,
which are the excellences of men, but in, and by those that are
divine, even such as were, and are of his own nature, and the
essence of his eternal Godhead. This is the righteousness without
the law, accomplished by a person and principles, far otherwise,
than is he, or those you make description of; and therefore yours
cannot be that, by which we stand just before the justice of God
without the law. Now if it be a righteousness without the law,
then it is a righteousness without men, a righteousness that cannot
be found in the world; for take away the law, the rule, and you
take away, not only the righteousness, but that by which men,
as men, work righteousness in the world: 'Mine own righteousness
which is of the law.' The righteousness then by which a man must
stand just in the sight of God from the curse, is not to be found
in men, nor in the law, but in him, and him only, who is greater,
and also, without the law; for albeit, for our sakes he became
under the law, even to the curse and displeasure of God; yet the
principles by which he walked in the world to Godward, they were
neither humane, nor legal, but heavenly, and done in the Spirit of
the Son. Wherefore it is not the righteousness you have described,
by which we stand just before God.

Third, The righteousness you have described, cannot be that which
justifieth us before God, because of its imperfections, and that
both with respect to the principle, and the power with which it
is managed: for though you have talked of a sound complexion of
soul, the purity of the humane nature, and that with this addition
of power, as to be able to keep itself incommixt with that which
is not of itself; yet we Christians know, and that by the words
of God, that there is in man, as man, now no soundness at all,
but from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, botches
and boils, putrefactions and sores (Isa 1:6). We are ALL an unclean
thing, and our righteousness as filthy ulcerous rags (Isa 64:6).
'If there had been a law given which could have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the law' (Gal 3:21). Could a
man perform the law to the liking of the justice of the eternal
majesty, then would the law give life to that man; but because
of the perfection of an infinite justice, and the weakness and
unprofitableness of the law through our flesh (Rom 8:3), therefore,
though you speak yet farther of the excellency of your sound
complexion, and of the purity of the human nature, you must fly
from yourself, to another righteousness for life, or at the last
stick in the jaws of death and everlasting desperation. 'For by
the works of the law shall no flesh be justified' (Gal 2:16).

It is therefore no better than error, thus to ascribe to poor
man, 'that hath drank iniquity like water,' a soundness of soul,
a purity of human nature. Wherefore Jude saith of you, and of all
such naturalists, 'That even in the things that you know naturally,
as the brute, in them you corrupt yourselves' (Jude 10), even
in the very principles, the first or original dictates of your
nature or humanity. There is none that understandeth or is good,
therefore there is none that doth good, no not one: that is, none
as continuing in a natural state; none by the power or principles
of nature; for he meaneth here, in your own sense, as men by
natural principles have to do with the justice of the law.

Fourth, The righteousness which you have described cannot be that
which justifieth us before God, because it is that which is not
of faith. 'The law is not of faith: but, The man that doeth them
shall live in them' (Gal 3:12). The apostle also in the 10th chapter
of the Romans tells us, that the righteousness that is completed
by doing the law is one, and another besides the righteousness
of faith. For faith in the justification of a sinner from the
curse and wrath of God, respecteth only the mercy of God, and
forgiveness of sins for the sake of Christ. 'God for Christ's sake
hath forgiven him that is enabled to believe, that is, trust to,
and venture the eternal concern of his soul upon the righteousness
that is no where to be found, but in the person of the Son of God.'
For there is justice more than answerable to all the demands of
the law, and equal to the requirements of the eternal justice of
God, and he is our justice; he is made unto us of God, righteousness,
or justice; that is, the righteousness or justice that is in him,
is by God accounted the man's that shall accept thereof by faith,
that he might be made the justice or righteousness of God in him.
For the righteousness that saveth a sinner from damnation must
be equal to that in the eternal Deity: But where can that be found
but in him that is naturally God, as is indeed the Son of the Father;
in him, therefore, and not in the law, there is a righteousness
fit for faith to apply to. Besides, the law is not, neither can
be, the object of faith to men; for that which is the object of
faith (I speak now as to justifying righteousness) it must be a
righteousness already completed, and as I said, a righteousness
to be received and accepted, being now perfected and offered, and
given to us by the kindness and mercy of God; but a man may believe
long enough in the law, before that performs for him a perfect
righteousness. The law can work nothing unless it be wrath. 'No
thou must work by, and not believe in, the law' (Rom 4). Besides,
all that cometh out of the mouth of the law is, 'Cursed is every
one that continueth not in all things which are written in the
book of the law to do them' (Gal 3:10), which no man is capable
of doing, so as to escape the curse by doing, that hath once, or
first transgressed the same. Wherefore it is a vain thing, yea an
horrible wickedness in you, thus to abuse the law, and the weakness
of man, by suggesting that the only, the ultimate, or grand design
of Christ Jesus was, or is, the promoting of a righteousness by
the law, that is performed by humane principles in us.[8]

I could double, yea ten times double the number of these arguments
against you, but I will pass from this to the second thing. 'The
righteousness you have described, is not the true gospel inward
holiness.'

I told you before, that the principles which you have described,
are not evangelical principles; and now I will add, that as they
are not such in themselves, so neither do they fetch in, or obtain
by our adhering to them, those things which alone can make, or
work in the soul, those truly gospel inward acts of holiness.

[Things essential to inward gospel holiness.]

There are three things which are essential to the inward gospel
holiness; of which as your description is utterly destitute,
so neither can they by that be obtained, or come into the heart.
1. The Holy Ghost. 2. Faith in Christ. 3. A new heart, and a new
spirit.

Without these three, there is no such thing as gospel holiness in
man, as before I have also hinted at. But now as there are none
of these three found in your description of inward holiness; so
neither can you, or others, by all your inclinations, either to
those you call first principles of natural reason, or the dictates
of human nature, obtain or fetch into the soul the least dram of
that which is essential, to that which is indeed according to the
gospel description of inward gospel holiness, as will further be
manifest in this that followeth.

1. The Holy Ghost is not obtained by your description, that consisting
only in principles of nature, and in putting forth itself in acts
of civility and morality. When the apostle would convince the
bewitched Galatians, that your doctrine which was also the doctrine
of the false apostles, was that, which instead of helping forward,
did hinder, and pervert the gospel of Christ; he applieth himself
to them in this manner. 'This only would I learn of you, Received ye
the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?'
(Gal 3:2) By the works of the law, that is, by putting of your
principles into practice. Nay, may I not add, by putting of your
principles into practice, by a more bright and clear rule, than
in the beginning of your description is inserted by you; for the
law as written and engraven in stones, with the addition of all
the Mosaical precepts, was a more ample, and full discovery of the
mind of God, than can be obtained by your virtues of soul, your
purity of human nature, or the first principles of morals, as
they are written in the heart of man; and originally dictates of
human nature (Rom 3:1-3). Yet by these, by following these, by
labouring to live up to the light of these, their own experience
told them, that they neither could, nor did obtain the enjoyment
of the Holy Ghost; but that rather their now declining the word of
faith, by which indeed they receive it at first (whatever pretences
of holiness, and godliness were the arguments to prevail with
them so to do) was in truth none other but the very witchcraft,
and enchantments of the devil.

Farther, The apostle sets this your spirit and principles, and
that which indeed is the Spirit of God, in a line diametrically
opposite one against another; yea the receiving of the one, opposeth
the receiving of the other. 'Now we have received, [saith he] not
the spirit of the world,' (that is, your spirit, and principles
of humanity) to walk by it, or live in it; 'but the Spirit which
is of God; that we may know the things that are freely given to
us of God' (1 Cor 2:12). But what is the spirit of the world? He
tells us in the verse before, it is the spirit of a man; which
Solomon calls, 'the candle of the Lord; searching all the inward
parts of the belly' (Prov 20:27), by human principles, good motions
to moral duties, workings of reason, dictates of nature to obey
God as Creator. These things flow from the spirit of a man, which
is the spirit of all the world. They that preach, or speak by this
spirit, they preach or speak of the world, of the virtues of the
world; and the world, 'the whole world heareth them,' or know in
themselves what they say (1 John 4:5).

Now when this spirit is received, embraced, and followed, as the
spirit that is of God, then it must be branded with the mark of the
spirit of error, and of antichrist; because the act in so doing,
is most wicked; yea, and Christ himself is made head against, by
it.

But I say, the Holy Ghost is not obtained by these principles,
nor by the pursuit of them.

2. Faith is not obtained by the pursuit of your principles, but
by hearing of another doctrine; he that presseth men to look to,
and live by the purity of human nature, principles of natural
reason, or by the law, as written in the heart, or bible; he sets
the word of faith out of the world; for these doctrines are as
opposite, as the spirits I spake of before; 'For Moses describeth
the righteousness which is of the law, That the man which doeth
those things shall live by them.' Now he that receiveth this law,
to do, and live by; he hath set up, and is in pursuit of a doctrine
of another nature, than that which is called the righteousness
of faith; that being such, as for justification, and deliverance
from the curse, maketh no mention at all of hearing the law, or of
doing good works; but of hearing of the mercy of God, as extended
to sinners; and of its coming to us through the death, and
resurrection of Christ Jesus. 'The righteousness which is of faith,
speaketh on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend
into heaven? [that is, to bring Christ down from above:] or, Who
shall descend into the deep? [that is, to bring up Christ again
from the dead]. But what saith it? The word is nigh thee, even
in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which
we preach; That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved' (Rom 10:5,9). This then is the
doctrine of faith, or the righteousness with which faith hath to
do. Now as old covenant-works are begotten in men by the doctrine
of works; so faith is begotten by the doctrine of faith. Therefore
after he had said, 'faith cometh by hearing'; he insinuates it
to be the hearing the preaching of the gospel of peace (peace by
the blood of the cross) and the glad tidings of good things (vv
14-17), of good things promised for the sake of the Lord Jesus;
not for the sake of good deeds done of us, by human principles,
or the dictates of our nature.

Faith, Then the second essential, comes into the heart, not by
the preaching, or the practice of your principles; but by another,
a higher, and far more heavenly doctrine. And hence the apostle
completely puts the difference betwixt the worker of good works
in the spirit of the law, and the believer that taketh hold of
grace by Christ, that he may be saved thereby. The one he calls
'Them that are of the works of the law'; the other, 'They which
are of faith' (Gal 3). This being done, he tells us, that as they
differ in the principles, to wit, of faith and works, so they shall
differ in conclusion: 'For the law is not of faith, the promise
is only made to faith; therefore, they only that are of faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham.'

3. The third essential is, a new heart, and a new spirit or mind;
and this also comes not by your principle, that being but the old
covenant that gendereth to bondage, and that holds its Ishmaels
under the curse for ever: there comes no new heart by the law,
nor new spirit. It is by the new covenant, even the gospel, that
all things are made new (Jer 31:33; Eze 36; Heb 8:8; 2 Cor 5:17-19).

The apostle, after a large discourse of the two ministrations, and
their excellencies (2 Cor 3), tells us that the heart is nothing
changed, so long as it abideth in the works of the law, but remaineth
blind and ignorant: 'Nevertheless [saith he] when it shall turn
[from the law] to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away.' But
what is it to turn from the law to the Lord? Why, even to leave
and forsake your spirit and principles, and works from those
principles, and fly to the grace and merits; 'the glory of the
Lord Jesus Christ.' Now when the heart is turned to Christ, then
the vail of Moses is taken off; wherefore then the soul 'with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, is changed--from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord' (2 Cor 3:14,18).

Objection. But it seems a paradox to many, that a man should
live to the law, that is, devote himself to the works of the ten
commandments, the most perfect rule of life; and yet not be counted
one changed, or new.

Answer. Though it seemeth an untruth, yet it is most true, that
by the works of the law, no heart is made new, no man made new.
A man from principle of nature and reason, (which principles are
of himself, and as old) may give up himself to the goodness of
the law: yet these principles are so far off from being new, that
they are as old as Adam in Paradise; and come into the world with
all the children of men. To which principles the law, or the first
principles of morals, so equally suit, that, as you have said (p.
8), 'they are self-evident, than which there is nothing mankind
doth more naturally assent to' (p. 11). Now nature is no new
principle, but an old: even our own, and of ourselves. The law
is no new principle, but old, and one with ourselves (as also you
well have called it) 'first written in men's hearts, and originally
dictates of human nature.' Let a man then be as devout, as
is possible for the law, and the holiness of the law. Yet if the
principles from which he acts, be but the habit of soul, the purity
(as he feigns) of his own nature; principles of natural reason,
or the dictates of human nature; all this is nothing else but
the old gentleman in his holiday clothes: the old heart, the old
spirit, the spirit of the man, not the spirit of Christ, is here.

And hence the apostle, when he would shew us a man alive, or made
a new man indeed; as he talketh of the Holy Ghost and faith, so he
tells us such are dead to the law, to the law, as a law of works;
to the law as to principles of nature. 'Wherefore, my brethren, ye
also are become dead to the law [the moral law, and the ceremonial
law] by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to another
[another than the law] even to him who is raised from the dead,
that we should bring forth fruit unto God' (Rom 7:4).

Ye are become dead to the law. Dead to the law! Why? That you should
be married to another. Married to another! Why? 'That you should
bring forth fruit unto God.' But doth not a man bring forth fruit
unto God, that walketh orderly according to the ten commandments?
No, if he do it before faith make this in the spirit of a man,
by the dictates of human nature, respecting the law, as that, by
the obeying of which, he must obtain acceptance with God. This
is bringing forth fruit unto himself; for all that he doth, he
doth it as a man, as a creature, from principles natural, and of
himself, his own, and for none other than himself; and therefore
he serveth in an old spirit, the oldness of the letter, and for
himself. But now (that is, ye being dead to the law, and married
to Christ) that (the law) being dead; by which (while in ourselves)
we were held; now we are delivered from that law, both as to its
curse and impositions, as it stands a law of works in the heart
of the world; we serve in newness of the spirit, 'and not in the
oldness of the letter' (v 6). A man must first then be dead to
your principles, both of nature and the law; if he will serve in
a new spirit, if he would bring forth fruit unto God.[9] Wherefore
your description of the principle of holiness in man, and also
the principles by which this holiness is put forth by him into
righteous nets; they are such as are altogether void of the true
essentials of inward gospel-holiness and righteousness.


[FOWLER'S ASSERTION THAT THE GRAND, THE ONLY AND ULTIMATE DESIGN
OF THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST IS TO RE-PRODUCE MAN'S ORIGINAL RIGHTEOUSNESS
EXAMINED AND CONFUTED.]

But there is one thing more in this description, or rather effect
thereof, which I shall also inquire into: and that is your saying,
'As it was the errand of Christ to effect our deliverance out of
that sinful state we had brought ourselves into: so to put us again
into possession of that holiness which we had lost' (p. 12). The
proof of this position is now your next business; that is, if I
understand your learning, the remaining part of your book, which
consisteth of well nigh 300 pages, is spent for proof thereof; which
I doubt not but effectually to confute with less than 300 lines.
Only first by the way, I would have my reader to take notice that
in this last clause, (to put us again into possession of that
holiness which we had lost) is the sum of all this large description
of his holiness in the foregoing pages; that is, the holiness
and righteousness that Mr. Fowler hath been describing; and adds,
that Christ's whole business when he came into the world was, as
to effect our deliverance from sin; 'so to put us again in possession
of that holiness which we had lost.' The holiness therefore
that here he contendeth for, is that, and only that which was in
Adam before the fall, which he lost by transgression; and we by
transgressing in him. A little therefore to inquire into this, if
perhaps his reader and mine may come to a right understanding of
things.

First then, Adam before the fall, even in his best and most sinless
state, was but a pure natural man, consisting of body and soul;
these, to use your own terms, were his pure essentials: (p. 11)
in this man's heart, God also did write the law; that is, as you
term them, the first principles of morals (p. 8). This then was
the state of Adam, he was a pure natural man; made by God sinless;
all the faculties of his soul and members of his body were clean.
'God made man upright' (Eccl 7:29). But he made him not then a
spiritual man; 'the first Adam was made a living soul,' 'howbeit
that was not first which is spiritual; but that which is natural,
and afterward that which is spiritual: The first man is of the
earth, earthy' (1 Cor 15:45-47). A living soul he was; yet but a
natural man, even in his first and best estate; but earthly, when
compared with Christ, or with them that believe in Christ. So then,
the holiness of Adam in his best estate, even that which he lost,
and we in him, it was none other, than that which was natural,
even the sinless state of a natural man. This holiness then was
not of the nature of that, which hath for its root the Holy Ghost;
for of that we read not at all in him, he only was indued with a
living soul; his holiness then could not be gospel, nor that which
is a branch of the second covenant: his acts of righteousness, were
not by the operations of the Spirit of grace, but the dictates of
the law in his own natural heart. But the apostle when he treateth
of the christian inherent holiness; first excluding that in Adam,
as earthly; he tells us, it is such as is in Christ: 'As is the
earthy, such are they that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such
are they that are heavenly.' Let then those that are the sons of
Adam, in the state of nature as he, though not so pure, and spotless
as he, be reckoned to bear his image and similitude: but let them
that are the children of Christ, though not so pure as he, bear
the image and similitude of Christ: 'for they are conformable to
the image of the Son of God' (Rom 8:29). The holiness therefore
that was in Adam, being but that which was natural, earthly, and
not of the Holy Ghost, cannot be that which Christ came into the
world to give us possession of.

Second, Adam in his best, and most sinless state, was but a type
or figure: 'The figure of him that was to come' (Rom 5:14). A
type in what? A type or figure doubtless, in his sinless and holy
estate, a type and figure of the holiness of Christ: But if Christ
should come from heaven, to put us in possession of this sinless
holiness that was in Adam, or that we lost in him: to what more
would his work amount, than to put us into the possession of
a natural, figurative, shadowish righteousness or holiness. But
this he never intended; therefore it is not the possessing of his
people with that holiness, that was the great errand Christ came
into the world upon.

Third, The holiness and righteousness that was in, and that we
lost by, Adam before the fall; was such as stood in, and was to
be managed by his natural perfect compliance with a covenant of
works. For, 'Do this sin and die,' were the terms that was from
God to Adam. But Christ at his coming brings in another, a better,
a blessed covenant of grace; and likewise possesseth his children,
with the holiness, and privileges of that covenant; not with
Adam's heart nor Adam's mind; but a new heart, a new spirit,
a new principle to act by, and walk in a new covenant. Therefore
the holiness that was in Adam before, or that we lost in him by
the fall, could not be the holiness that Christ at his coming made
it his great or only business to put us in possession of.

Fourth, The holiness that was in Adam before, and that we lost in
him by the fall, was such as might stand with perfect ignorance
of the mediation of Jesus Christ: for Christ was not made known to
Adam as a Saviour, before that Adam was a sinner; neither needed
he at all to know him to be his Mediator, before he knew he
had offended (Gen 3). But Christ did not come into the world to
establish us in, or give us possession of such holiness as might
stand with perfect ignorance of his Mediatorship. No; the holiness
that we believers have, and the righteous acts that we fulfil,
they come to us, and are done by us, through the knowledge of the
Lord Jesus, and of his being the Messias promised (Eph 4:21,22;
2 Peter 1:3).

Fifth, The holiness that was in Adam, was neither given him
through the promise, neither encouraged by the promise. Adam had
no promise to possess him with a principle of holiness; it came
to him by creation; neither had he any promise to strengthen or
encourage him in holiness. All he had was instructions concerning
his duty, and death threatened if he did it not (Gen 2:15-17).
But Christ came not to give us possession of an holiness or
righteousness, that came to us by our creation, without a promise;
and that hath no promise to encourage us to continue therein; but
of an holiness that comes to us by the best of promises, and that
we are encouraged to by the best of promises. Therefore it was not
his great errand when he came from heaven to earth, to put us in
possession of that promiseless holiness that Adam had before, and
that was lost in him by the fall.

Lastly, In a word; the holiness that Adam had before, and that we
lost in him by the fall; it was a natural shadowish old covenant,
promiseless holiness; such as stood and might be walked in, while
he stood perfectly ignorant of the Mediator Christ. Wherefore it
is rather the design of your Apollo the devil,[10] whom in p. 101
you bring forth to applaud your righteousness; I say, it is rather
his design than Christ's, to put men upon an endeavour after a
possession of that: for that which is truly evangelical, is the
spiritual, substantial, new covenant promised holiness; that which
cometh to us by, and standeth in the Spirit, faith and knowledge
of the Son of God, not that which we lost in Adam. Wherefore the
song which there you learnt of the devil, is true, in the sense
he made it, and in the sense for which you bring it; which is, to
beget in men, the highest esteem of their own human nature; and
to set up this natural, shadowish, promiseless, ignorant holiness,
in opposition to that which is truly Christ's.

To dwell in heaven doth not more please him, than Within the souls
of pious mortal men.

This is the song; but you find it not in Matthew, Mark, Luke, or
John, but among the heathens who were his disciples, and who were
wont to inquire at his mouth, and learn of him.

Thus have I razed the foundation of your book, even by overthrowing
the holiness, and righteousness, which by you is set up, as
that which is the only true gospel, and evangelical. Wherefore
it remaineth, that the rest of your book, viz. whatever therein
is brought, and urged for the proof of this your description of
holiness, &c. it is but the abuse of Christ, of scripture, and
reason; it is but a wresting and corrupting the word of God, both
to your own destruction, and them that believe you.

[Fowler's insidious errors routed.]

But to pass this, and to come to some other passages in your book;
and first to that in p. 5 where you say,

'The holiness, which is the design of the religion of Christ
Jesus,--is not such as is subjected in any thing without us, or
is made ours by a mere external application,' &c.

Answer. 1. These words secretly smite at the justification that
comes by the imputation of that most glorious righteousness that
alone resideth in the person of the Lord Jesus; and that is made
ours by an act of eternal grace, we resting upon it by the faith
of Jesus.

2. But if the holiness of which you speak, be not subjected in
any thing without us; then it is not of all that fulness which it
pleased the Father should dwell in Christ: for the holiness and
righteousness, even the inward holiness that is in saints, it is
none other than that which dwelleth in the person of the Son of
God in heaven: neither doth any man partake of, or enjoy the least
measure thereof, but as he is united by faith to this Son of God,
the thing is as true in him as in us; in him as the head, and
without measure (1 John 2:8); and is originally seated in him,
not in us. 'Of his fulness have all we [saints] received, and
grace for grace' (John 1:16). Wherefore the holiness that hath
its original from us, from the purity of the human nature (which
is the thing you aim at) and that originally, as you term it, is
the dictates thereof, is the religion of the Socinians, Quakers,[11]
&c., and not the religion of Jesus Christ.

And now I will come to your indifferent things, viz., those which
you call 'positive precepts'; things, say you, 'of an indifferent
nature; and absolutely considered, are neither good, nor
evil;--but are capable of becoming so; only by reason of certain
circumstances': of these positive indifferent precepts, you say,
you know but three in the gospel; but three, that are purely so,
viz., 'That of going to God by Christ, and the institutions of
baptism, and the Lord's Supper.' This we have in p. 7 and 9.

Answer. These words, as I hinted before, are highly derogatory to
the Lord, the King of glory; and trample as much upon the blood
of the Son of God, as words can likely do. For,

1. If going to God by Christ, be in itself but an indifferent
thing, then, as I also hinted before, it is not of the substance
of Christianity; but a man may be truly a Christian without it;
may be saved, and go to heaven without it; this is in truth the
consequence of your words: for things purely of an indifferent
nature, do not in themselves either make or mar the righteousness
that justifieth us from the curse before God. Wherefore, by your
argument, if a man remain ignorant of that positive precept,
of 'coming to God by Christ'; he remaineth ignorant but of an
indifferent thing, a thing that in itself is neither good nor evil,
and therefore not essentially material to his faith or justifying
righteousness.

2. An indifferent thing in itself is next to nothing, neither good
nor evil then, but a thing betwixt them both.

Then is the blood of the Lord Jesus, in itself, of no value at
all; nor faith in him, of itself, any more than a thing of nought;
their virtue and goodness only dependeth upon certain circumstances
that make them so. For the indifferency of the thing lieth not
simply in coming to God, but in coming to him by Christ: coming
otherwise to God, even in this man's eyes, being the all in all;
but in this coming, in coming to him by Christ, there lieth the
indifferency. I marvel what injury the Lord Jesus hath done this
man, that he should have such indifferent thoughts of coming to
God by him?

But hath he no better thoughts of his own good deeds, which are
by the law? Yes, doubtless, for those (saith he) 'are of an
indispensable, and eternal obligation, which were first written
in men's hearts, and originally dictates of human nature' (p. 8).
Mark, not a dictate of human nature, or necessary conclusion or
deduction from it, is of an indifferent, but of an indispensable;
not of a transient, but of an eternal obligation. It is only
going to God by Christ, and two other things that he findeth in
the gospel, that of themselves are of an indifferent nature.

But how indifferent? Even as indifferent in itself as the blood of
a silly sheep, or the ashes of an heifer; for these are his very
words. 'SUCH [that is, such ordinances as in themselves are of an
indifferent nature] were all the injunctions and prohibitions of
the ceremonial law; and some few such we have under the gospel'
(p. 7). Then, in p. 9 he tells you what these positive precepts
under the gospel, or things indifferent, are: 'THAT of going to
God by Christ, is one; and the other two, are the institutions
of baptism, and the Lord's supper.' Such therefore as were the
ceremonies of the law, such, even such, saith he, is that of going
to God by Christ, &c.

Wherefore, he that shall lay no more stress upon the Lord Jesus
to come to God by, than this man doth, would lay as much, were the
old ceremonies in force, upon a silly sheep, as upon the Christ
of God. For these are all alike positive precepts, such as were
the ceremonies of the law, things in themselves neither good nor
evil, but absolutely considered of an indifferent nature.

So that to come to God by Christ, is reckoned, of itself, by him,
a thing of a very indifferent nature, and therefore this man cannot
do it, but with a very indifferent heart; his great, and most
substantial coming to God, must needs be by some other way (John
10:1). But why should this THIEF love thus to clamber, and seek
to go to God by other means; such which he reckoneth of a more
indispensable nature, and eternal; seeing Christ only, as indifferent
as he is, is the only way to the Father. 'I am the way, [saith he]
the truth and the life; no man cometh to the Father but by me.'
If he be the only way, then there is none other; if he be thus
the truth, then is all other the lie; and if he be here the life,
then is all other the death; let him call them indispensable and
eternal never so often.

So then, how far off this man's doctrine is, of sinning against
the Holy Ghost, let him that is wise consider it. For if coming
to God by Christ, be in itself but a thing indifferent, and only
made a duty upon the account of certain circumstances; then, to
come to God by Christ, is a duty incumbent upon us only by reason
of certain circumstances; not that the thing in itself is good, or
that the nature of sin, and the justice of God, layeth a necessity
on us so to do. But what be these certain circumstances? For it
is because of these, if you will believe him, that God the Father,
yea, the whole Trinity, did consult in eternity, and consent,
that Christ should be the way to life: now, I say, it is partly
because by him was the greatest safety, he being naturally the
justice, wisdom, and power of God; and partly, because it would,
we having sinned, be utterly impossible we should come to God by
other means and live. He that will call these circumstances, that
is, things over and above besides the substantials of the gospel,
will but discover his unbelief and ignorance, &c.

As for your saying, that Calvin, Peter Martyr, Musculus, Zanchy,[12]
and others, did not question, but that God could have pardoned
sin, without any other satisfaction, than the repentance of the
sinner (p. 84). It matters nothing to me, I have neither made my
creed out of them, nor other, than the holy scriptures of God.

But if Christ was from before all worlds ordained to be the
Saviour, then was he from all eternity so appointed and prepared
to be. And if God be, as you say, infinitely (p. 136), and I will
add, eternally just; how can he pardon without he be presented
with that satisfaction for sin, that to all points of the highest
perfection doth answer the demands of this infinite, and eternal
justice? Unless you will say, that the repentance of a sinner
is sufficient to answer whatever could be justly demanded as a
satisfaction thereto; which if you should, you would in consequence
say, that man is, or may be in himself, just, that is, equal with
God; or that the sin of man was not a transgression of the law that
was given, and a procurer of the punishment that is threatened,
by that eternal God that gave it. (But let me give you a caution,
take heed that you belie not these men) Christ cries, 'If it
be possible let this cup pass from me' (Matt 26:39). If what be
possible? Why, that sinners should be saved without his blood (Heb
9:22; Luke 24:26; Acts 17:3). 'Ought not Christ to have suffered?'
'Christ must needs have suffered,' not because of some certain
circumstances, but because the eternal justice of God, could not
consent to the salvation of the sinner, without a satisfaction for
the sin committed.[13] Of which, more in the next, if you shall
think good to reply.

Now, that my reader may see that I have not abused you in this
reply to your sayings, I will repeat your words at large, and
leave them upon you to answer it.

You say, 'Actions may become duties or sins these two ways; first,
as they are compliances with, or transgressions of, divine positive
precepts: These are the declarations of the arbitrary will of God,
whereby he restrains our liberty, for great and wise reasons, in
things that are of an indifferent nature, and absolutely considered are
neither good nor evil; and so makes things not good in themselves
[and capable of becoming so only by reason of certain circumstances]
duties, and things not evil in themselves, sins. Such were all
the injunctions and prohibitions of the ceremonial law, and some
few such we have under the gospel' (p. 7). Then p. 9 you tell us,
that 'the reasons of the positive laws [that is, concerning things
in themselves indifferent] contained in the gospel are declared;
of which [say you] I know not above three that are purely so, viz.
That of going to God by Christ, and the institutions of baptism,
and the Lord's Supper.'

Here now let the reader note, That the positive precepts, declarations
of the arbitrary will of God, in things of an indifferent nature,
being such, as absolutely considered, are neither good nor evil;
some few SUCH, say you, we have under the gospel, namely, that
of coming to God by Christ, &c. I am the more punctual in this
thing, because you have confounded your weak reader with a crooked
parenthesis in the midst of the paragraph, and also by deferring
to spit your intended venom at Christ, till again you had puzzled
him, with your mathematics and metaphysics, &c., putting in another
page, betwixt the beginning and the end of your blasphemy.

Indeed, in the seventh chapter of your book, you make a great
noise of the effects and consequences of the death of Christ, as
that it was a sacrifice for sin, an expiatory, and propitiatory
sacrifice (p. 83). Yet, he that well shall weight you, and compare
you with yourself, shall find that words and sense, with you are
two things; and also, that you have learned of your brethren of
old, to dissemble with words, that thereby your own heart-errors,
and the snake that lieth in your bosom, may yet there abide the
more undiscovered. For in the conclusion of that very chapter,
even in and by a word or two, you take away that glory, that of
right belongeth to the death and blood of Christ, and lay it upon
other things.

For you say, 'The scriptures that frequently affirm, that the
end of Christ's death was the forgiveness of our sins, and the
reconciling of us to his Father, we are not so to understand,
[those places where this is expressed] as if these blessings
were absolutely thereby procured for us any otherwise, than upon
condition of our effectual believing' (p. 91).

I answer, By the death of Christ was the forgiveness of sins
effectually obtained for all that shall be saved, and they, even
while yet enemies, by that were reconciled unto God. So that, as
to forgiveness from God, it is purely upon the account of grace
in Christ; 'We are justified by his blood, we are reconciled to
God by the death of his Son' (Rom 5:9,10). Yea peace is made by
the blood of his cross (Cor 1:20), and God for Christ's sake hath
forgiven us (Eph 4:32). So then, our effectual believing is not
a procuring cause in the sight of God, or a condition of ours
foreseen by God, and the motive that prevaileth with him to forgive
us our manifold transgressions: Believing being rather that which
makes application of that forgiveness, and that possesseth the
soul with that peace that already is made for us with God, by the
blood of his Son Christ Jesus; 'Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ' (Rom 5:1). The peace
and comfort of it cometh not to the soul, but by believing. Yet
the work is finished, pardon procured, justice being satisfied
already, or before, by the precious blood of Christ.

Observe, I am commanded to believe, but what should I believe?
Or what should be the object of my faith in the matter of my
justification with God? Why, I am to believe in Christ, I am to
have faith in his blood? But what is it to believe in Christ: and
what to have faith in his blood? Verily, To believe that while we
were yet sinners Christ died for us, that even then, when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son: To
believe that there is a righteousness already for us completed.

I had as good give you the apostle's argument and conclusion in
his own language. 'But God commendeth his love toward us, in that,
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then,
being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him' (Rom 5:8,9). And note that the word NOW respects the
same time with YET that went before. 'For if, when we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life,' or intercession (Rom
5:10).

Believing then, as to the business of my deliverance from the
curse before God, is an accepting of (1 Tim 1:15), a trusting to
(Eph 1:12,13), or a receiving (John 1:12), the benefit that Christ
hath already obtained for me; by which act of faith, I see my
interest in that peace that is made before with God by the blood
of his cross: For if peace be made already by his blood, then is
the curse taken away from his sight; if the curse be taken away
from his sight, then there is no sin with the curse of it to
be charged from God by the law, for so long as sin is charged by
the law, with the curse thereto belonging, the curse, and so the
wrath of God remaineth.

'But [say you] Christ died to put us into a capacity of pardon'
(p. 91).

Answer. True; but that is not all. He died to put us into the
personal possession of pardon: Yea, to put us into a personal
possession of it, and that before we know it.

'But [say you] the actual removing of our guilt is not the necessary
and immediate result of his death' (p. 91).

Answer. Yea, but it is from before the face of God, and from the
judgment and curse of the law; for before God the guilt is taken
away, by the death and blood of his Son, immediately, for all
them that shall be saved; else how can it be said we are justified
by his blood; he hath made peace by his blood. 'He loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood' (Rev 1:5), and that we are
reconciled to God by the death of his Son; which can by no means
be; if, notwithstanding his death and blood, sin in the guilt, and
consequently the curse that is due thereto, should yet remain in
the sight of God. But what saith the apostle? 'God was in Christ,
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them' (2 Cor 5:19). Those that are but reconciling, are not
yet reconciled: I mean, as Paul, not yet come aright over in their
own souls by faith; yet to these he imputeth not their trespasses:
Wherefore? because they have none: or because he forgiveth them
as they believe and work: Neither of both; but because he hath
first made his Son to be sin for them, and laid all the guilt
and curse of their sin upon him, that they might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Therefore even because by him their
sin and curse is taken off, from before the law of God; therefore,
God for the sake of Christ, seeketh for, and beseecheth the sinner
to be reconciled; that is, to believe in, and embrace his majesty.

'No [say you] the actual removing of our guilt, is not the necessary
and immediate result of his death; but suspended until such time
as the forementioned conditions, by the help of his grace, are
performed by us' (p. 92).

Answer. 1. Then may a man have the grace of God within him; yea,
the grace and mercy of the new covenant, viz. Faith, and the
like, that yet remaineth under the curse of the law; and so hath
yet his sins untaken away from before the face of God; for where
the curse is only suspended, it may stand there notwithstanding,
in force against the soul. Now, let the soul stand accursed, and
his duties must stand accursed: For first the person, and then
the offering must be accepted of God. God accepted not the works
of Cain, because he had not accepted his person (Gen 4:5). But
having first accepted Abel's person, he therefore did accept his
offering (Heb 11:4). And hence it is said, that Abel offered by
faith: He believed that his person was accepted of God, for the
sake of the promised Messias, and therefore believed also that
his offering should be accepted.

2. Faith, as it respecteth justification in the sight of God, must
know nothing to rest upon but the mercy of God, through Christ's
blood: But if the curse be not taken away, mercy also hangeth in
suspense; yea, lieth as drowned, and hid in the bottom of the sea.
This doctrine then of your's overthroweth faith, and rusheth[14]
the soul into the works of the law, the moral law; and so quite
involveth it in the fear of the wrath of God, maketh the soul forget
Christ, taketh from it the object of faith; and if a miracle of
mercy prevent not, the soul must die in everlasting desperation.

'But [say you] it is suspended till such time as the forementioned
conditions, by the help of his grace, are performed by us' (p.
92).

Answer. Had you said the manifestation of it is kept from us,
it might, with some allowance, have been admitted; but yet the
revelation of it in the word, which in some sense may be called
a manifestation thereof, is first discovered to us by the word;
yea, is seen by us, and also believed as a truth recorded; before
the enjoyment thereof be with comfort in our own souls (1 John
5:11).

But you proceed and say, 'Therefore was the death of Christ designed
to procure our justification from all sins past, that we might be
by this means provoked to become new creatures' (p. 92).

Answer. That the death of Christ is a mighty argument to persuade
with the believer, to devote himself to God in Christ, in all
things, as becometh one that hath received grace and redemption
by his blood, is true; but that it is in our power, as is here
insinuated, to become new creatures, is as untrue. The new creature,
is of God; yea, immediately of God; man being as incapable to
make himself anew, as a child to beget himself (2 Cor 5:17,18).
Neither is our conformity to the revealed will of God, any thing
else, if it be right, than the fruit and effect of that. All things
are already, or before, become new in the Christian man. But to
return:

After all the flourish you have made about the death of Christ, even
as he is an expiatory, and propitiatory sacrifice; in conclusion,
you terminate the business far short of that for which it
was intended of God: for you almost make the effects thereof but
a bare suspension of present justice and death for sin; or that
which hath delivered us at present from a necessity of dying, that
we might live unto God; that is, according as you have stated it.
'That we might from principles of humanity and reason, act towards
the first principles of morals, &c. till we put ourselves into a
capacity of personal and actual pardon.'

Answer. The sum of your doctrine therefore is, that Christ by his
death only holds the point of the sword of justice, not that he
received it into his own soul; that he suspends the curse from us,
not that himself was made a curse for us, that the guilt might be
remitted by our virtues; not that he was made to be our sin: But
Paul and the New Testament, giveth us account far otherwise; viz.
'That Christ was made our sin, our curse, and death, that we by
him [not by the principles of pure humanity, or our obedience to
your first principles of morals, &c.] should be set free from the
law of sin and death' (2 Cor 5:21; Gal 3:13).

If any object that Christ hath designed the purifying our hearts
and natures; I answer,

But he hath not designed to promote, or to perfect that righteousness
that is founded on, and floweth from, the purity of our human nature;
for then he must design the setting up man's righteousness, that
which is of the law: and then he must design also the setting up
of that which is directly in opposition, both to the righteousness,
that of God is designed to justify us; and that by which we are
inwardly made holy. As I have shewed before.

You have therefore, Sir, in all that you have yet asserted, shewed
no other wisdom than a heathen, or of one that is short, even of
a novice in the gospel.

In the next place, I might trace you chapter by chapter; and at
large refute, not only the whole design of your book by a particular
replication to them; but also sundry and damnable errors, that
like venom drop from your pen.

But as before I told you in general, so here I tell you again,
That neither the scriptures of God, the promise, or threatenings,
the life, or death, resurrection, ascension, or coming again of
Christ to judgment; hath the least syllable or tendency in them
to set up your heathenish and pagan holiness or righteousness;
wherefore your whole discourse is but a mere abuse of, and corrupting
the holy scriptures, for the fastening, if it might have been,
your errors upon the godly. I conclude then upon the whole, that
the gospel hath cast out man's righteousness to the dogs; and
conclude that there is no such thing as a purity of human nature,
as a principle in us, thereby to work righteousness withal. Farther,
It never thought of returning us again to the holiness we lost in
Adam, or to make our perfection to consist in the possession of
so natural, and ignorant[15] a principle as that is, in all the
things of the holy gospel; but hath declared another and far better
way, which you can by no means understand by all the dictates of
your humanity.

I will therefore content myself at present with gathering up some
few errors, out of those abundance which are in your book; and so
leave you to God, who can either pardon these grievous errors, or
damn you for your pride and blasphemies.

[Fowler's false quotations of scripture.]

You pretend in the beginning of your second chapter, to prove your
assertion, viz. 'That the great errand that Christ came upon, was
to put us again into possession of that holiness which we had lost'
(p. 12). For proof whereof you bring John the Baptist's doctrine
(Matt 3:1,2), and the angel's saying to Zacharias (Luke 1:16,17),
and the prophet Malachi (3:1-3), in which texts there is as much
for your purpose, and no more, than there is in a perfect blank;
for which of them speak a word of the righteousness or holiness
which we have lost? Or where is it said, either by these mentioned,
or by the whole scripture, that we are to be restored to, and put
again into possession of that holiness? These are but the dictates
of your human nature.

John's ministry was, 'To make ready a people prepared for the
Lord Jesus'; not to possess them with themselves and their own,
but now lost, holiness. And so the angel told his father, saying,
'Many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their
God': Not to Adam's innocency, or to the holiness that we lost by
him. Neither did the prophet Malachi prophesy that Christ at his
coming should put men again in possession of the holiness we had
lost. And I say again, as you here fall short of your purpose, so
I challenge you to produce but one piece of a text, that in the
least looketh to such a thing. The whole tenor of the scripture,
that speaks of the errand of Christ Jesus, tells us another
lesson, to wit, That he himself came to save us, and that by his
own righteousness; not that in Adam, or which we have lost in
him, unless you can say and prove that we had once, even before
we were converted, the holiness of Christ within us, or the
righteousness of Christ upon us.

But you yet get on, and tell us, 'That this was also the prophesy
of the angel to Joseph (p. 14) in these words HE [Jesus] shall save
his people from their sins.' 'Not [say you] from the punishment
of them, although that be a true sense too; but not the primary,
but secondary, and implied only, and the consequence of the former
salvation' (p. 15).

Answer. Thus Penn the quaker and you run in this, in one and the
self same spirit; he affirming that sanctification is antecedent
to justification, but not the consequence thereof.

2. But what salvation? Why salvation? say you: First from the filth;
for that is the primary and first sense: justification from the
guilt, being the never-failing consequence of this. But how then
must Jesus Christ, first save us from the filth? You add in p. 16,
'That he shall bring in, instead of the ceremonial observations,
a far more noble, viz., An inward substantial righteousness: and
by abrogating that [namely of the ceremonies] he shall establish
only this inward righteousness.' This is, that holiness,
or righteousness you tell us of, in the end of the chapter going
before, that you acknowledge we had lost; so that the sum of all
that you have said, is, That the way that Christ will take to
save his people from their sins, is, first to restore unto them,
and give them possession of, the righteousness that they had lost
in Adam: and having established this in them, he would acquit them
also of guilt. But that this is a shameless error, and blasphemy,
is apparent, from which hath already been asserted of the nature
of the holiness, or righteousness, that we have lost, viz., That
it was only natural of the old covenant, typical: and such as might
stand with perfect ignorance of the mediation of Jesus Christ: and
now I add, That for Christ to come to establish this righteousness,
is alone, as if he should be sent from heaven, to overthrow, and
abrogate the eternal purpose of grace, which the Father had purposed
should be manifested to the world by Christ. But Christ came not
to restore, or to give us possession of that which was once our
own holiness, but to make us partakers of that which is in him,
'that we might be made partakers of HIS holiness.' Neither (were
it granted that you speak the truth) is it possible for a man to
be filled with inward gospel holiness, and righteousness, that yet
abideth, as before the face of God, under the curse of the law,
or the guilt of his own transgressions (Heb 12). The guilt must
therefore, first be taken off, and we set free by faith in that
blood, that did it, before we can act upon pure Christian principles.
Pray tell me the meaning of this one text; which speaking of
Christ, saith, 'Who when he had by himself purged our sins, sat
down on the right hand of the Majesty on high' (Heb 1:3). Tell
me, I say, by this text, whether is here intended the sins of all
that shall be saved? If so, what kind of a purging is here meant,
seeing thousands, and thousands of thousands, of the persons
intended by this act of purging were not then in being, nor their
personal sins in act? And note, he saith, he purged them, before
he sat down at the right hand of God: purging then, in this place,
cannot first, and primarily, respect the purging of the conscience:
but the taking, the complete taking of the guilt, and so the curse
from before the face of God, according to other scriptures: 'He
hath made him to be sin, and accursed of God for us.' Now he being
made the sin which we committed, and the curse which we deserved;
there is no more sin nor curse; I mean to be charged by the law,
to damn them that shall believe, not that their believing takes
away the curse, but puts the soul upon trusting to him, that
before purged this guilt, and curse: I say, before he sat down on
the right hand of God; not to suspend, as you would have it, but
to take away the sin of the world. 'The Lord hath laid upon him
the iniquities of us all' (Isa 53:6). And he bare them in his
own body on the tree (1 Peter 2:24): nor yet that he should often
offer himself; for then must he often have suffered since the
foundation of the world: but now, (and that at once,) in the end
of the world hath he appeared, to put away sin, by the sacrifice
of himself (Heb 9:24-26). Mark, he did put it away by the sacrifice
of his body and soul, when he died on the cross: but he could
not then put away the inward filth of those, that then remained
unconverted; or those that as yet wanted being in the world. The
putting away of sin therefore, that the Holy Ghost here intendeth,
is, such a putting of it away, as respecteth the guilt, curse, and
condemnation thereof, as it stood by the accusations of the law,
against all flesh before the face of God; which guilt, curse, and
condemnation, Christ himself was made in that day, when he died
the death for us. And this is the first and principal intendment
of the angel, in that blessed saying to godly Joseph, concerning
Christ; 'He shall save his people from their sins'; from the
guilt and curse due to them, first: and afterwards from the filth
thereof. This is yet manifest, further; because the heart is
purified by faith, and hope (Acts 15:9; 1 John 3:3). Now it is
not the nature of faith; I mean, of justifying faith, to have any
thing for an object; from which it fetcheth peace with God, and
holiness before, or besides the Christ of God himself; for he is
the way to the Father: and no man can come to the Father, but by
him. Come; that is, so as to find acceptance, and peace with him:
the reason is, because without his blood, guilt remains (Heb 9:22).
He hath made peace by the blood of his cross: so then, faith in
the first place seeketh peace. But why peace first? Because till
peace is fetched into the soul, by faith's laying hold on the blood
of Christ: sin remains in the guilt and curse, though not in the
sight of God, yet upon the conscience, through the power of
unbelief. 'He that believeth not, stands yet condemned' (John
3:18,19). Now, so long as guilt, and the curse in power remains,
there is not purity, but unbelief; not joy, but doubting; not
peace, but peevishness; not content, but murmuring, and angering
against the Lord himself. 'The law worketh wrath' (Rom 4:15).
Wherefore, as yet there can be no purity of heart, because that
faith yet wants his object. But having once found peace with God
by believing what the blood of Christ hath done; joy followeth;
so doth peace, quietness, content, and love; which is also the
fulfilling of the law: yet not from such dungish principles as
yours, for so the apostle calls them (Phil 3:8). But from the Holy
Ghost itself; which God, by faith, hath granted to be received by
them that believe in the blood of his Jesus.

But you add, That Christ giveth, first repentance, and then
forgiveness of sins (p. 17).

Answer. 1. This makes nothing for the holiness which we lost in
Adam: for the proof of which you bring that text (Acts 5:31).

2. But for Christ to take way guilt, and the curse, from before the
face of God, is one thing; and to make that discovery, is another.

3. Again, Christ doth not give forgiveness for the sake of that
repentance, which hath its rise, originally from the dictates
of our own nature, which is the thing you are to prove; for that
repentance is called the sorrow of this world, and must be again
repented of: but the repentance mentioned in the text, is that
which comes from Christ: But,

4. It cannot be for the sake of gospel-repentance, that the
forgiveness of sins is manifested, because both are his peculiar
gift.

5. Therefore, both faith, and repentance, and forgiveness of sins,
are given by Christ; and come to us, for the sake of that blessed
offering of his body, once for all. For after he arose from
the dead, having led captivity captive, and taken the curse from
before the face of God: therefore his Father gave him gifts for
men, even all the things that are necessary, and effectual, for
our conversion, and preservation in this world, &c. (Eph 4:8).

This text, therefore, with all the rest you bring, falleth short
of the least shew of proof, 'That the great errand for which Christ
came into the world was--to put us in possession of the holiness
that we had lost.'

Your third chapter is as empty of the proof of your design as
that through which we have passed: there being not one scripture
therein cited, that giveth the least intimation, that ever it
entered into the heart of Christ to put us again into possession
of that holiness which we had before we were converted: for such
was that we lost in Adam.

You tell us the sum of all is, 'that we are commanded to add to
our faith, virtue,' &c. (p. 25). I suppose you intend a gospel
faith, which if you can prove Adam had before the fall, and that
we lost this faith in him; and also that this gospel faith is none
other, but that which originally ariseth from, or is the dictates
of human nature, I will confess you have scripture, and knowledge
beyond me. In the mean time you must suffer me to tell you, you
are as far in this from the mind of the Holy Ghost, as if you had
yet never in all your days heard whether there be a Holy Ghost
or no.

Add to your faith. The apostle here lays a gospel principle, viz.,
Faith in the Son of God: which faith layeth hold of the forgiveness
of sins, alone for the sake of Christ; therefore he is a great
way off, of laying the purity of the human nature, the law, as
written in the heart of natural man, as the principle of holiness;
from whence is produced good works in the soul of the godly.

In your fourth chapter also (p. 28) even in the beginning thereof;
even with one text you have overthrown your whole book.

This chapter is to prove, that the only design of the promises,
and threatenings of the gospel, is to promote, and put us again in
possession of the holiness we had lost. For that the reader must
still remember, is the only design of your book (p. 12). Whereas
the first text you speak of (2 Peter 1:4), maketh mention of the
Divine nature, or of the Spirit of the living God, which is also
received by the precious faith of Christ, and the revelation of
the knowledge of him; this blessed Spirit, and therefore not the
dictates of human nature, is the principle that is laid in the
godly: but Adam's holiness had neither the knowledge, or faith,
or Spirit of the Lord Jesus, as its foundation, or principle: yea,
nature was his foundation, even his own nature was the original,
from whence his righteousness and good works arose.

The next scriptures also, viz. 2 Corinthians 7:1; Romans 12:1
overthrow you; for they urge the promises as motives to stir us
up to holiness. But Adam had neither the Spirit of Jesus, or faith
him in him, as a principle: nor any promises to him as motives:
wherefore this was not that to which he, or which we Christians
are exhorted to seek the possession of; but that which is operated
by that Spirit which we receive by the faith of Jesus, and that
which is encouraged by those promises, that God hath since given
to them that have closed by faith with Jesus.

The rest also (in p. 29), not one of them doth promise us the
possession of the holiness we have lost, or any mercy to them that
have it.

You add: 'And whereas the promises of pardon, and of eternal life
are very frequently made to believing; there is nothing more
evidently declared, than that this faith is such as purifieth the
heart, and is productive of good works' (p.30).

Answer. 1. If the promise be made at all to believing, it is not
made to us upon the account of the holiness we had lost; for
I tell you yet again, that holiness is not of faith, neither was
faith the effect thereof. But,

2. The promises of pardon, though they be made to such a faith as
is fruitful in good works: yet not to it, as it is fruitful in
doing, but in receiving good. Sir, the quality of justifying faith
is this, Not to work, but to believe, as to the business of pardon
of sin: and that not only, because of the sufficiency that this
faith sees in Christ to justify, but also for that it knows those
whom God thus pardoneth, he justifieth as ungodly. 'But to him
that worketh not, but believeth'; (Mark, here faith and works are
opposed) 'But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that
justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness'
(Rom 4:5).

You add farther, 'That the promises may be reduced to these three
heads; that of the Holy Spirit, of remission of sins, and eternal
happiness, in the enjoyment of God' (p. 30).

Answer. If you can prove that any of these promises were made to
the holiness that we had lost, or that by these promises we are to
be possessed with that holiness again; I will even now lay down
the bucklers. For albeit, the time will come when the saints shall
be absolutely, and perfectly sinless; yet then shall they be also
spiritual, immortal, and incorruptible, which you cannot prove
Adam was, in the best of his holiness, even that which we lost in
him.

The threatenings you speak of[16] are every one made against sin,
but not one of them to drive us into a possession of that holiness
that we had lost: nay, contrariwise, he that looks to, or seeks
after that, is as sure to be damned, and go to hell, as he that
transgresseth the law; because that is not the righteousness of
God, the righteousness of Christ, the righteousness of faith, nor
that to which the promise is made.

And this was manifested to the world betimes, even in that day, when
God drove the man and his wife out of Eden, and placed cherubims,
and a flaming sword, in the way by which they came out, to the
end, that by going back by that way, they might rather be killed
and die, than lay hold of the 'tree of life' (Gen 3).

Which the apostle also respects, when he calleth the way of the
gospel, the NEW and LIVING way, even that which is made by the
blood of Christ (Heb 10:20); concluding by this description of
the way that is by blood, that the other is old, and the way of
death, even that which is by the moral law, or the dictates of our
nature, or by that fond conceit of the goodly holiness of Adam.

[Our Lord's object not merely to restore man's natural holiness,
but to impart his own infinite and eternal holiness to those that
believe.]

Your fifth chapter tells us, 'That the promoting of holiness was
the design of our Saviour's whole life and conversation among men'
(p. 36).

Answer. 1. Were this granted, it reacheth nothing at all the design
for which you in your way present us with it: For,

2. That which you have asserted is: That the errand about which
Christ came, was, as the effecting our deliverance out of that
sinful state we had brought ourselves into, so to put us again in
possession of that holiness which we had lost; for that, you say,
is the business of your book (p. 12). Wherefore you should have
told us in the head of this chapter, not so much that our Saviour
designed the promoting of holiness in general by his life, but that
the whole design of our Saviour's life and conversation, was to
put us again into possession of that holiness which we had lost,
into a possession of that natural, old covenant, figurative,
ignorant holiness. But it seems you count that there is no other
than that now lost, but never again to be obtained holiness, that
was in Adam.

3. Farther, you also falter here, as to the stating of the
proposition; for in the beginning of your book, you state it thus:
That the enduing men with inward real righteousness, or true
holiness, was the ultimate end of our Saviour's coming into the
world, still meaning the holiness we lost in Adam. You should
therefore in this place also, have minded your reader of this your
proposition, and made it manifest if you could, 'that the ultimate
end of our Saviour's whole life and conversation, was the enduing
men with this Adamitish holiness.' But holiness, and that holiness,
is alone with you; and to make it his end, and whole end; his
business, and the whole business of his life; is but the same with
you.

But you must know, that the whole life and conversation of our
Saviour, was intended for another purpose, than to drive us back
to, or to endue us with, such an holiness and righteousness as I
have proved this to be.

You have therefore, in this your discourse, put an insufferable
affront upon the Son of God, in making all his life and conversation
to centre and terminate in the holiness we had lost: As if the Lord
Jesus was sent down from heaven, and the word of God made flesh;
that by a perfect life and conversation, he might shew us how holy
Adam was before he fell; or what an holiness that our holiness
was, which we had before we were converted.

Your discourse therefore, of the life and conversation of the
Lord Jesus, is none other than heathenish: For you neither treat
of the principle, his Godhead, by which he did his works; neither
do you in the least, in one syllable, aver the first, the main
and prime reason of this his conversation; only you treat of it so
far, as a mean man might have considered it. And indeed it stood
not with your design to treat aright with these things; for had
you mentioned the first, though but once, your Babel had tumbled
about your ears; for if in the holy Jesus did 'dwell the word,' one
of the three in heaven; or if the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ
was truly, essentially, and naturally God; then must the principle
from whence his works did proceed, be better than the principle
from whence proceeded the goodness in Adam; otherwise Adam must
be God and man. Also you do, or may know that the self-same act
may be done from several principles: and again, that it is the
principle from whence the act is done, and not the bare doing
of the act, that makes it better or worse accepted, in the eyes
either of God or men.

Now then, to shew you the main, or chief design of the life and
conversation of the Lord Jesus.

First, It was not to shew us what an excellent holiness we once
had in Adam, but that thereby God, the Eternal Majesty, according
to his promise, might be seen by, and dwell with, mortal men:
For the Godhead being altogether in its own nature invisible, and
yet desirous to be seen by, and dwell with the children of men;
therefore was the Son, who is the self-same substance with the
Father, closed with, or tabernacled in our flesh; that in that
flesh, the nature and glory of the Godhead might be seen by,
and dwell with us: 'The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us,
[and we beheld his glory, (what glory? the glory,) as of the only
begotten of the Father] full of grace and truth' (John 1:14). Again,
'The life [that is, the life of God, in the works and conversation
of Christ] was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness,
and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father,
and was manifested unto us' (1 John 1:2). And hence he is called
the image of the invisible God (Col 1:15); or he by whom the
invisible God is most perfectly presented to the sons of men.
Did I say before, that the God of glory is desirous to be seen of
us? Even so also, have the pure in heart, a desire that it should
be so: 'Lord, say they, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us'
(John 14:8). And therefore the promise is for their comfort, that
'they shall see God' (Matt 5:8). But how then must they see him?
Why, in the person, and by the life and works of Jesus. When
Philip, under a mistake, thought of seeing God some other way,
than in and by this Lord Jesus Christ; What is the answer? 'Have
I been so long time with you, [saith Christ] and yet hast thou
not known me, Philip? He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father;
and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father? Believest thou not
that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I
speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father, that dwelleth
in me, he doth the works. Believe me, that I am in the Father,
and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very works' sake'
(John 14:9-11). See here, that both the words and works of the
Lord Jesus, were not to shew you, and so to call you back to the
holiness that we had lost, but to give us visions of the perfections
that are in the Father. He hath given us 'the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ' (2 Cor 4:6). And hence
it is, that the apostle, in that brief collection of the wonderful
mystery of godliness, placeth this in the front thereof: 'God was
manifest in the flesh' (1 Tim 3:16). Was manifest, viz. In and
by the person of Christ, when in the flesh he lived among us;
manifest, I say, for this, as one reason, that the pure in heart,
who long after nothing more, might see him. 'I beseech thee,' said
Moses, 'shew me thy glory.'[17] 'and will God indeed dwell with
men on the earth?' saith Solomon.

Now to fulfil the desires of them that fear him, hath he shewed
himself in flesh unto them; which discovery principally is made
by the words and works of Christ. But,

Second, Christ by his words and works of righteousness, in the days
of his flesh, neither shewed us which was, nor called us back to
the possession of the holiness that we had lost; but did perfect,
in, and by himself, the law for us, that we had broken. Man being
involved in sin and misery, by reason of transgression committed
against the law, or ministration of death, and being utterly unable
to recover himself therefrom, the Son of God himself assumeth the
flesh of man, and for sin condemned sin in that flesh. And that
first, by walking, through the power of his eternal Spirit, in the
highest perfection to every point of the whole law, in its most
exact and full requirements; which was to be done, not only without
commixing sin in his doing, but by one that was perfectly without
the least being of it in his nature; yea, by one that now as
God-Man, because it was God whose law was broken, and whose justice
was offended: For, were it now possible to give a man possession
of that holiness that he hath lost in Adam, that holiness could
neither in the principle nor act deliver from the sin by him before
committed. This is evident by many reasons: 1. Because it is not
a righteousness able to answer the demands of the law for sin;
that requiring not only a perfect abiding in the thing commanded,
but a satisfaction by death, for the transgression committed
against the law. 'The wages of sin is death' (Rom 6:23). Wherefore
he that would undertake the salvation of the world, must be one who
can do both these things; one that can perfectly do the demands of
the law in thought, word, and deed, without the least commixture
of the least sinful thought in the whole course of his life: He
must be also able to give by death, even by the death that hath
the curse of God in it, a complete satisfaction to the law for the
breach thereof. Now this could none but Christ accomplish; none
else having power to do it. 'I have power [said he] to lay down
my life, and I have power to take it again: And this commandment
have I received of my Father' (John 10:18). This work then must be
done, not by another earthly Adam, but by the Lord from Heaven;
by one that can abolish sin, destroy the devil, kill death, and
rule as Lord in heaven and earth. Now the words and works of the
Lord Jesus, declared him to be such an one. He was first without
sin; then he did no sin; neither could either the devil, the whole
world, or the law, find any deceit in his mouth: But by being
under the law, and walking in the law, by that Spirit which was
the Lord God of the law, he not only did always the things that
pleased the Father, but by that means in man's flesh, he did
perfectly accomplish and fulfil that law which all flesh stood
condemned by. It is a foolish and an heathenish thing, nay worse,
to think that the Son of God should only, or specially fulfil,
or perfect the law, and the prophets, by giving more and higher
instances of moral duties than were before expressly given (p.
17). This would have been but the lading of men with heavy burthens.
But know then, whoever thou art that readest, that Christ's
exposition of the law was more to shew thee the perfection of his
own obedience, than to drive thee back to the holiness thou hadst
lost; for God sent him to fulfil it, by doing it, and dying to the
most sore sentence it could pronounce: not as he stood a single
person, but common,[18] as Mediator between God and man; making
up in himself the breach that was made by sin, betwixt God and
the world. For,

Third, He was to die as a lamb, as a lamb without blemish, and
without spot, according to the type; 'Your lamb shall be without
blemish' (Exo 12:5). But because there was none such to be found
BY and AMONG all the children of men; therefore God sent HIS from
heaven. Hence John calls him the Lamb of God (John 1:29), and
Peter him that was without spot, who washed us by his blood (1
Peter 1:19). Now wherein doth it appear that he was without spot
and blemish, but as he walked in the law? These words therefore
without spot are the sentence of the law, who searching him could
find nothing in him why he should be slain, yet he died because
there was sin: Sin! where? Not in him, but in his people; 'For the
transgression of my people was he stricken' (Isa 53:8). He died
then for our sins, and qualified himself so to do, by coming
sinless into the world, and by going sinless through it; for had
he not done both these, he must have died for himself. But being
God, even in despite of all that stumble at him, he conquered
death, the devil, sin, and the curse, by himself, and then sat
down at the right hand of God.

Fourth, And because he hath a second part of his priestly office
to do in heaven; therefore it was thus requisite that he should
thus manifest himself to be holy and harmless, undefiled, and
separate from sinners on the earth (Heb 7:26). As Aaron first put
on the holy garments, and then went into the holiest of all. The
life, therefore, and conversation of our Lord Jesus, was to shew us
with what a curious robe and girdle he went into the holy place;
and not to shew us with what an Adamitish holiness he would possess
his own. 'Such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens';
that he might always be accepted, both in person and offering, when
he presenteth his blood to God, the atonement for sin. Indeed in
some things he was an example to us to follow him; but mark, it
was not as he was Mediator, not as he was under the law to God, not
as he died for sin, nor as he maketh reconciliation for iniquity.
But in these things consist the life of our soul, and the beginning
of our happiness. He was then exemplary to us, as he carried
it meekly and patiently, and self-denyingly towards the world:
But yet not so neither to any but such to whom he first offered
justification by the means of his righteousness; for before he
saith 'learn of me,' he saith, 'I will give you rest'; rest from
the guilt of sin, and fear of everlasting burnings (Matt 11). And
so Peter first tells us, he died for our sins; and next, that he
left us an example (1 Peter 2:21). But should it be granted that
the whole of Christ's life and conversation among men was for
our example, for no other end at all, but that we should learn to
live by his example, yet it would not follow, but be as far from
truth as the ends of the earth are asunder, that by this means he
sought to possess us with the holiness we had lost, for that he
had not in himself; it is true he was born without sin, yet born
God and man; he lived in the world without sin, but he lived as
God-Man: he walked in and up to the law, but it was as God-Man.
Neither did his manhood, even in those acts of goodness, which as
to action, most properly respected it; do ought without, but by
and in conjunction with his Godhead: Wherefore all and every whit
of the righteousness and good that he did was that of God-Man, the
righteousness of God. But this was not Adam's principle, nor any
holiness that we had lost.

Your fifth chapter, therefore, consisteth of words spoken to the
air.

Your sixth chapter tells us, 'That to make men truly virtuous and
holy, was the design of Christ's inimitable actions, or mighty
works and miracles, and these did only tend to promote it' (p.
68).

He neither did, nor needed, so much as one small piece of a miracle
to persuade men to seek for the holiness which they had lost, or
to give them again possession of that; for that as I have shewed,
though you would fain have it otherwise, is not at all the Christian
or gospel righteousness. Wherefore, in one word, you are as short
by this chapter to prove your natural old covenant, promiseless,
figurative holiness, to be here designed, as if you had said so
much as amounts to nothing. Farther, Christ needed not to work a
miracle to persuade men to fall in love with themselves, and their
own natural dictates; to persuade them that they have a purity
of the human nature in them; or that the holiness which they have
lost, is the only true, real, and substantial holiness: These
things, both corrupted nature and the devil, have of a long time
fastened, and fixed in their minds.

His miracles therefore tend rather to take men off of the pursuit
after the righteousness or holiness that we had lost, and to confirm
unto us the truth of a far more excellent and blessed thing; to
wit, the righteousness of God, of Christ, of faith, of the Spirit,
which that you speak of never knew; neither is it possible that
he should know it who is hunting for your sound complexion, your
purity of human nature, or its dictates, as the only true, real,
and substantial righteousness. 'They are ignorant of God's
righteousness, that go about to establish their own righteousness';
and neither have, nor can, without a miracle, submit themselves unto
the righteousness of God. They cannot submit themselves thereto;
talk thereof they may, notion it they may, profess it too they may;
but for a man to submit himself thereto, is by the might power of
God.

Miracles and signs are for them that believe not (1 Cor 14:22).
Why for them? That they might believe; therefore their state is
reckoned fearful that have not yet believed for all his wondrous
works. And though he did so many miracles among them, yet they
believed him not (John 12:37-40). But what should they believe?
That Jesus is the true Messias, the Christ that should come into
the world. Do you say that I blaspheme (saith Christ) because
I said I am the Son of God: 'If I do not the works of my Father
believe me not; but if I do, though ye believe not me believe the
works: that ye may know, and believe that the Father is in me,
and I in him' (John 10:37,38). But what is it to believe that he
is Messias, or Christ? Even to believe that this man Jesus was
ordained and appointed of God (and that before all worlds) to be
the Saviour of men, by accomplishing in himself an everlasting
righteousness for them, and by bearing their sins in his body on
the tree; that it was he that was to reconcile us to God, by the
body of his flesh, when he hanged on the cross. This is the doctrine
that at the beginning Christ preached to that learned ignorant
Nicodemus. 'As Moses [said he] lifted up the serpent in the wilderness,
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth
in him should not perish, but have eternal life' (John 3:14,15).
The serpent was lifted up upon a pole (Num 21:9): 'Christ was
hanged on a tree.' The serpent was lifted up for murmurers: Christ
was hanged up for sinners: The serpent was lifted up for them
that were bitten with fiery serpents, the fruits of their wicked
murmuring: Christ was hanged up for them that are bitten with
guilt, the rage of the devil, and the fear of death and wrath: The
serpent was hanged up to be looked on: Christ was hanged up that
we might believe in him, that we might have faith in his blood:
They that looked upon the serpent of brass lived: They that believe
in Christ shall be saved, and shall never perish. Was the serpent
then lifted up for them that were good and godly? No, but for the
sinners: 'So God commended his love to us, in that, while we were
yet sinners Christ died for us.' But what if they that were stung,
could not, because of the swelling of their face, look up to the
brazen serpent? then without remedy they die: So he that believeth
not in Christ shall be damned. But might they not be healed by
humbling themselves? one would think that better than to live by
looking up only: No, only looking up did it, when death swallowed
up them that looked not. This then is the doctrine, 'Christ came
into the world to save sinners': according to the proclamation
of Paul, 'Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that
through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins;
And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from
which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.' The forgiveness
of sins: But what is meant by forgiveness? Forgiveness doth strictly
respect the debt, or punishment that by sin we have brought upon
ourselves. But how are we by this man forgiven this? Because by
his blood he hath answered the justice of the law, and so made
amends to an offended majesty. Besides, this man's righteousness
is made over to him that looks up to him for life; yea, that man
is made the righteousness of God in him. This is the doctrine that
the miracles were wrought to confirm, and that, both by Christ,
and his apostles, and not that holiness and righteousness, that
is the fruit of a feigned purity of our nature.

Take two or three instances for all.

First, 'Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him,
How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell
us plainly. Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not;
the works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me.
But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep' (John 10:24-26).

By this scripture the Lord Jesus testifies what was the end of
his words and wondrous works, viz. That men might know that he
was the Christ; that he was sent of God to be the Saviour of the
world; and that these miracles required of them, first of all,
that they accept of him by believing; a thing little set by, by
our author, first in p. 299 he preferreth his doing righteousness
far before it, and above all things else, his words are verbatim
thus, 'Let us exercise ourselves unto real and substantial godliness,
[such as he hath described in the first part of his book, viz.
That which is the dictates of his human nature, &c.] and in keeping
our consciences void of offence, both towards God and towards
men, and in studying the gospel to enable us, not to discourse,
or only to believe, but also and above all things to do well.'
But believing, though not with this man, yet by Christ and his
wondrous miracles, is expected first, and above ALL things, from
men; and to do well, in the best sense (though his sense is the
worst) is that which by the gospel is to come after.

Second, 'Go into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he
that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow
them that believe: In my name shall they cast out devils, they
shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents, and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them,' &c. (Mark
16:15-18).

Mark you here, it is believing, believing; It is, I say, believing
that is here required by Christ. Believing what? The gospel; even
good tidings to sinners by Jesus Christ; good tidings of good,
glad tidings of good things. Mark how the apostle hath it; the
glad tidings is, 'That through this man [Jesus] is preached unto
you the forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified
by the law of Moses' (Acts 13:38,39).

These signs shall follow them that believe. Mark, signs before,
and signs after, and all to excite to, and confirm the weight of
believing. 'And they went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord
working with them, and confirming the word with signs following.
Amen' (Mark 16:20).

Third, 'Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them
slip. For if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward;
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at
the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto
us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness both with
signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost, according to his own will' (Heb 2:1-4).

Here we are excited to the faith of the Lord Jesus, under these
words 'so great salvation.' As if he had said, give earnest heed,
the most earnest heed, to the doctrine of the Lord Jesus, because
it is 'so great salvation.' What this salvation is, he tells us,
it is that which was preached by the Lord himself; 'For God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life'
(John 3:16). God so loved, that he gave his Son to be so great
salvation. Now as is expressed in the text, to be the better for
this salvation, is, to give heed to hear it; for 'Faith cometh by
hearing' (Rom 10:17).

He saith not give heed to doing, but to the word you have heard;
faith, I say, cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God
(Rom 10). But that this hearing is the hearing of faith, is farther
evident:

1. Because he speaketh of a great salvation, accomplished by the
love of God in Christ, accomplished by his blood. 'By his own blood
he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us' (Heb 9:12).

2. This salvation is set in opposition to that which was propounded
before, by the ministration of angels, which consisted in a law
of works; that which Moses received to give to the children of
Israel. 'For the law [a command to works and duties] was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ' (John 1:17). To
live by doing works is the doctrine of the law and Moses; but to
live by faith and grace, is the doctrine of Christ, and the gospel.

Besides, the threatening being pressed with an 'How shall we
escape?' Respects still a better, a freer, a more gracious way
of life, than either the moral or ceremonial law; for both these
were long before: But here comes in another way, not that propounded
by Moses, or the angels, but since by the Lord himself. 'How shall
we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them
that heard him.'

Now mark, It is this salvation, this so great and eternal salvation,
that was obtained by the blood of the Lord himself. It was this,
even to confirm faith in this, that the God of heaven himself came
down to confirm, by signs and wonders; 'God bearing them witness,
both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts
of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will' (Heb 2:4).

Thus we see, that to establish a holiness that came from the first
principles of morals in us, or that ariseth from the dictates of
our human nature, or to drive us back to that figurative holiness
that we had once, but lost in Adam, is little thought on by Jesus
Christ, and as little intended by any of the gospel miracles.

A word or two more. The tribute money you mention,[19] was not as
you would clawingly insinuate for no other purpose, than to shew
Christ's loyalty to the magistrate: But first, and above all,
to shew his godhead, to confirm his gospel, and then to shew his
loyalty, the which, Sir, the persons you secretly smite at, have
respect for, as much as you.

Again, Also the curse of the barren fig-tree, mentioned (p. 73) was
not (if the Lord himself may be believed) to give us an emblem of
a person void of good works; but to shew his disciples the power
of faith, and what a wonder-working thing that blessed grace is.
Wherefore, when the disciples wondered at that sudden blast that
was upon the tree, Jesus answered not, behold an emblem of one void
of moral virtues; but 'Verily, I say unto you, If ye have faith,
and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the
fig-tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou
removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done. And
all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, ye shall
receive' (Matt 21:21,22). Again, Mark saith, When Peter saw the
fig-tree that the Lord had cursed dried up from the roots, he
said to his master, 'behold the fig-tree which thou cursedst is
withered away' (11:21). Christ now doth not say as you, this tree
was an emblem of a professor void of good works; but, 'Have faith
in, or the faith of God. For, verily I say unto you, That whosoever
shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast
into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe
that those things which he said shall come to pass, he shall have
whatsoever he saith. Therefore I say unto you, What things soever
ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall
have them.' Christ Jesus therefore had a higher, and a better end,
than that which you propound, in his cursing the barren fig-tree,
even to shew, as himself expounds it, the mighty power of faith;
and how it lays hold of things in heaven, and tumbleth before it
things on earth. Wherefore your scriptureless exposition, doth
but lay[20] you even Solomon's proverb, 'The legs of the lame are
not equal,' &c. (Prov 26:7).

I might enlarge; but enough of this; only here I add, that the
wonders and miracles that attend the gospel, were wrought, and
are recorded, to persuade to faith in Christ. By faith in Christ
men are justified from the curse, and judgment of the law. This
faith worketh by love, by the love of God it brings up the heart
to God, and goodness; but not by your covenant (Eze 16:61), not
by principles of human nature, but of the Spirit of God; not in
a poor, legal, old covenant, promiseless, ignorant, shadowish,
natural holiness, but by the Holy Ghost.

[The death of Christ accomplished an infinitely greater object
than the restoring of man to his original temporal holiness.]

I come now to your seventh chapter; but to that I have spoken
briefly already, and therefore here shall be the shorter.

In this chapter you say, 'that to make men holy was the design of
Christ's death' (p. 78).

Answer. 1. But not with your described principles of humanity,
and dictates of human nature. He designed not, as I have fully
proved, neither by his death, nor life, to put us into a possession
of the holiness which we had lost, though the proof of that be
the business of your book.

2. To make men holy, was doubtless designed by the death and blood
of Christ: but the way and manner of the proceeding of the Holy
Ghost therein, you write not of; although the first text you
mention (p. 78,79) doth fairly present you with it. For the way
to make men inwardly holy, by the death and blood of Christ, is,
first, to possess[21] them with the knowledge of this, that their
sins were crucified with him, or that he did bar them in his body
on the tree: 'Knowing this, that our Old Man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin' (Rom 6:6). So he died for all, that they
that live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, as you
would have them, nor to the law or dictates of their own nature,
as your doctrine would persuade them; 'but to him that died for
them, and rose again' (2 Cor 5:15).

There are two things, in the right stating of the doctrine of the
effects of the death and blood of Christ, that do naturally effect
in us an holy principle, and also a life becoming such a mercy.

First, For that by it we are set at liberty, by faith therein,
from the guilt, and curse that is due to guilt, from death, the
devil, and the wrath to come. No encouragement to holiness like
this, like the persuasion, and belief of this; because this carrieth
in it the greatest expression of love, that we are capable of
hearing or believing, and there is nothing that worketh on us so
powerfully as love. 'Herein is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins' (1 John 4:10). He then that by faith can see that the body
of his sin did hang upon the cross, by the body of Christ, and
that can see by that action, death and sin, the devil and hell,
destroyed for him; it is he that will say, 'Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name,' &c. (Psa
103:1-4).

Second, Moreover, the knowledge of this giveth a man to understand
this mystery, That Christ and himself are united in one. For faith
saith, If our Old Man was crucified with Christ, then were we
also reckoned in him, when he hanged on the cross, 'I am crucified
with Christ' (Gal 2:20). All the Elect did mystically hang upon
the cross in Christ. We then are dead to the law, and sin, first,
by the body of Christ (Rom 7:4). Now he that is dead is free from
sin; now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live
with him, knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no
more, death hath no more dominion over him; for in that he died,
he died unto sin once; but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God:
likewise reckon yourselves also dead unto sin, but alive unto
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord (Rom 6). This also Peter doth
lively discourse of, 'Forasmuch then [saith he] as Christ hath
suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the
same mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from
sin' (1 Peter 4:1). By which words he insinuateth the mystical
union that is between Christ the head, and the Elect his body:
arguing from the suffering of a part, there should be a sympathy
in the whole. If Christ then suffered for us, we were (even
our sins, bodies and souls) reckoned in him when he so suffered.
Wherefore, by his sufferings, the wrath of God for us is appeased,
the curse is taken from us: for as Adam by his acts of rebellion,
made all that were in him guilty of his wickedness; so Christ by
his acts, and doings of goodness, and justice; made all that were
reckoned in him good, and just also: but as Adam's transgression
did first, and immediately reside with, and remain in the person
of Adam only, and the imputation of that transgression to them
that sprang from him; so the goodness, and justice, that was
accomplished by the second Adam, first, and immediately resideth
in him, and is made over to his also, by the imputation of God.
But again, as they that were in Adam, stood not only guilty of
sin, by imputation, but polluted by the filth that possessed him
at his fall; so the children of the second Adam, do not only, though
first, stand just by virtue of the imputation of the personal acts
of justice, and goodness done by Christ; but they also receive of
that inward quality, the grace, and holiness that was in him, at
the day of his rising from the dead.[22]

Thus therefore come we to be holy, by the death, and blood of the
Lord: this also is the contents of those other scriptures, which
abusively you cite, to justify your assertion, to wit.

'That the great errand of Christ in coming into the world, was--to
put us again into possession of the holiness which we had lost.
And that only designed the establishing such a holiness, as is
seated originally in our natures, and originally dictates of the
human nature.' The rest of the chapter being spoken to already,
I pass it, and proceed to the next.

Your eighth chapter tells us, 'That it is only the promoting of
the design of making men holy, that is aimed at by the apostles
insisting on the doctrines of Christ's resurrection, ascension,
and coming again to judgment.'

Though this should be granted, as indeed it ought not; yet there
is not one syllable in all their doctrines, that tendeth in the
least to drive men back to the possession of the holiness we had
lost; which is still the thing asserted by you, and that, for the
proof of which you make this noise, and ado. Neither did Christ
at all design the promoting of holiness, by such principles as you
have asserted in your book; neither doth the holy Spirit of God,
either help us in, or excite us to our duty, SIMPLY from such
natural principles.

But the apostles in these doctrines you mention, had far other
glorious designs; such as were truly gospel, and tended to strengthen
our faith yet farther: As,

First, For the resurrection of Christ; they urge THAT, as an
undeniable argument, of his doing away sin, by his sacrifice and
death: 'He was delivered for our offences,' because he put himself
into the room, and state of the wicked, as undertaking their
deliverance from death, and the everlasting wrath of God. Now
putting himself into their condition, he bears their sins, and
dies their death; but how shall we know, that by undertaking this
work, he did accomplish the thing he intended? the answer is, 'He
was raised again for our justification' (Rom 4:25). Even to make
it manifest, that by the offering of himself he had purged our
sins from before the face of God. For in that he was raised again,
and that by him, for the appeasing of whose wrath he was delivered
up to death; it is evident that the work for us, was by him
effectually done: for God raised him up again. And hence it is
that Paul calls the resurrection of Christ, 'the sure mercies of
David. And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now
no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give
you the sure mercies of David' (Acts 13:34). For Christ having
conquered and overcome death, sin, the devil, and the curse, by
himself, as it is manifest he did, by his rising from the dead;
what now remains for him, for whom he did this, but mercy and
goodness for ever?

Wherefore the resurrection of Christ is that which sealeth the
truth of our being delivered from the wrath by his blood.

Second, As to his ascension they [the inspired writers] urge and
make use of that, for divers weighty reasons also.

1. As a farther testimony yet, of the sufficiency of his righteousness
to justify sinners withal: for if he that undertaketh the work,
is yet entertained by him, whose wrath he was to appease thereby:
What is it? But that he hath so completed that work. Wherefore he
saith, that the Holy Ghost shall convince the world; that he hath
a sufficient righteousness, and that because he went to the Father
and they saw him no more (John 16), because he, when he ascended
up to the Father, was there entertained, accepted, and embraced
of God. That is an excellent word. 'He is chosen of God, and
precious.' Chosen of God to be the righteousness, that his Divine
Majesty is pleased with, and takes complacency in; God hath chosen,
exalted, and set down Christ at his own right hand; for the sweet
savour that he smelled in his blood, when he died for the sins of
the world.

2. By his ascension he sheweth how he returned conqueror, and
victor over our enemies. His ascension was his going home, from
whence he came, to deliver us from death: now it is said, that
when he returned home, or ascended, 'he led captivity captive' (Eph
4), that is, carried them prisoners, whose prisoners we were: He
rode to heaven in triumph, having in chains the foes of believers.

3. In that he ascended, it was, that he might perform for us, the
second part of his priestly office, or mediatorship. He is gone
into heaven itself, there 'now to appear in the presence of God
for us' (Heb 9:24). 'Wherefore, he is able also to save them to
the uttermost, that come unto God by him, [as indifferent a thing
as you make it to be] seeing he ever liveth [viz. in heaven,
whither he is ascended] to make intercession for them' (7:25).

4. He ascended, that he might be exalted not only above, but be
made head over all things to the church. Wherefore now in heaven,
as the Lord in whose hand is all power, he ruleth over, both men,
and devils, sin, and death, hell, and all calamities, for the good
and profit of his body, the church (Eph 1:19-23).

5. He ascended to prepare a place for us, who shall live and die
in the faith of Jesus (John 14:1-3).

6. He ascended, because there he was to receive the Holy Ghost,
the great promise of the New Testament; that he might communicate
of that unto his chosen ones, to give them light to see his wonderful
salvation, and to be as a principle of holiness in their souls:
'For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not
yet glorified' (John 7:39). But when he ascended on high, even as
he led captivity captive, so he received gifts for men; by which
gifts he meaneth the Holy Ghost, and the blessed and saving
operations thereof (Luke 24; Acts 1:2).

Third. As to his coming again to judgment, that doctrine is urged,
to shew the benefit that the godly will have at that day, when
he shall gather together his elect, and chosen, from one end of
heaven unto the other. As also to shew you what an end he will
make with those who have not obeyed his gospel (Matt 25; 2 Thess
1:8; 2 Peter 3:7-11).

Now it is true, all these doctrines do forcibly produce an holy,
and heavenly life, but neither from your principles, nor to the
end you propound; to wit, that we should be put into possession
of our first, old covenant righteousness, and act from human and
natural principles.

Your ninth chapter is spent, as you suppose, to shew us the
nature, and evil of sin; but because you do it more like a heathen
philosopher, than a minister of the gospel, I shall not much
trouble myself therewith.

Your tenth chapter consisteth in a commendation of virtue, but
still of that, and no other, though counterfeited for another,
than at first you have described (chap. 1) even such, which is
as much in the heathens you make mention of, as in any other man,
being the same both in root, and branches, which is naturally to be
found in all men, even as is sin and wickedness itself. And hence
you call it here, a living up to your feigned 'highest principles,
like a creature possessed of a mind and reason.' Again, 'While we
do thus, we act most agreeably to the right frame and constitution
of our souls, and consequently most naturally; and all the actions
of nature, are confessedly very sweet and pleasant'; of which very
thing you say, 'the heathens had a great sense' (p. 113,114).

Ans. No marvel, for it was their work, not to search the deep things
of God, but those which be the things of a man, and to discourse
of that righteousness, and principle of holiness, which was
naturally founded, and found within themselves, as men; or, as
you say, 'as creatures possessed with a mind and reason.' But as
I have already shewed, all this may be, where the Holy Ghost and
faith is absent, even by the dictates, as you call them, of human
nature; a principle, and actions, when trusted to that, as much
please the devil, as any wickedness that is committed by the
sons of men. I should not have thus boldly inserted it, but that
yourself did tell me of it (p. 101). But I believe it was only
extorted from you; your judgment, and your Apollo, suit not here,
though indeed the devil is in the right; for this righteousness
and holiness which is our own, and of ourselves, is the greatest
enemy to Jesus Christ: the post against his post, and the wall
against his wall. 'I came not to call the righteous [puts you quit
of the world] but sinners to repentance.'

[Man in wretched uncertainty if he possessed no better holiness
than that of Adam in his creation.]

Your eleventh chapter is, to shew what a miserable creature that
man is, that is destitute of your holiness.

Ans. And I add, as miserable is he, that hath, or knoweth no better.
For such an one is under the curse of God, because he abideth in
the law of works, or in the principles of his own nature, which
neither can cover his sins from the sight of God, nor possess him
with faith or the Holy Ghost.

There are two things in this chapter, that proclaim you to be
ignorant of Jesus Christ.

First, you say, It is not possible a wicked man should have God's
pardon (p. 119,130).

Secondly, You suppose it to be impossible for Christ's righteousness
to be imputed to an unrighteous man (p. 120).

Ans. To both which, a little briefly; God doth not use to pardon
painted sinners, but such as are really so. Christ died for sinners
(1 Tim 1:15), and God justifieth the ungodly (Rom 5:6-9), even
him that worketh not (4:3-5), nor hath no works to make him godly
(9:18; Isa 33:11). Besides, pardon supposes sin; now he that is a
sinner is a wicked man; by nature a child of wrath, and, as such,
an object of the curse of God, because he hath broken the law of
God. But such God pardoneth; not because they have made themselves
holy, or have given up themselves to the law of nature, or to
the dictates of their human principles, but because he will be
gracious, and because he will give to his beloved Son Jesus Christ,
the benefit of his blood.

As to the second head, what need is there that the righteousness
of Christ should be imputed, where men are righteous first? God
useth not thus to do; his righteousness is for the 'stout-hearted,
that are far from righteousness' (Isa 46:12).

The believing of Abraham was while yet he was uncircumcised; and
circumcision was added, not to save him by, but as a seal of the
righteousness of that faith, which he had, being yet uncircumcised.
Now we know that circumcision in the flesh, was a type of circumcision
in the heart (Rom 2); wherefore the faith that Abraham had, before
his outward circumcision, was to shew us, that faith, if it be
right, layeth hold upon the righteousness of Christ, before we
be circumcised inwardly; and this must needs be so: for if faith
doth purify the heart, then it must be there before the heart is
purified. Now this inward circumcision is a seal, or sign of this:
that that is the only saving faith, that layeth hold upon Christ
before we be circumcised. But he that believeth before he be
inwardly circumcised, must believe in another, in a righteousness
without him, and that, as he standeth at present in himself
ungodly; for he is not circumcised; which faith, if it be right,
approveth itself also so to be, by an after work of circumcising
inwardly. But, I say, the soul that thus layeth hold on Christ,
taketh the only way to please his God, because this is that also,
which himself hath determined shall be accomplished upon us. 'Now
to him that worketh, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but
of debt. But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that
justifieth THE UNGODLY, his faith is counted for righteousness'
(Rom 4). He that is ungodly, hath a want of righteousness, even
of the inward righteousness of works: but what must become of him?
Let him believe in him that justifieth the ungodly, because, for
that purpose, there is in him a righteousness. We will now return
to Paul himself; he had righteousness before he was justified by
Christ; yet, he choose to be justified rather as an unrighteous
man, than as one endued with so brave a qualification. That I may
'be found in him, not having mine own righteousness,' away with
mine own righteousness; I choose rather to be justified as ungodly,
by the righteousness of Christ, than by mine own, and his together
(Phil 3).

You argue therefore, like him that desireth to be a teacher of the
law, (nay worse,) that neither knoweth what he saith, nor whereof
he affirmeth. But you say,

'Were it possible that Christ's righteousness could be imputed
to an unrighteous man, I dare boldly affirm that it would signify
as little to his happiness, while he continueth so, as would a
gorgeous, and splendid garment, to one that is almost starved,'
&c (p. 12).

Ans. 1. That Christ's righteousness is imputed to men, while
sinners, is sufficiently testified by the word of God (Eze 16:1-8;
Zech 3:1-5; Rom 3:24-25, 4:1-5, 5:6-9; 2 Cor 5:18-21; Phil 3:6-8;
1 Tim 1:15,16; Rev 1:5).

2. And that the sinner, or unrighteous man, is happy in this
imputation, is also as abundantly evident. For, (1.) The wrath
of God, and the curse of the law, are both taken off by this
imputation. (2.) The graces and comforts of the Holy Ghost, are
all entailed to, and followers of, this imputation. 'Blessed is
he to whom the Lord will not impute sin.' It saith not, that he is
blessed that hath not sin to be imputed, but he to whom God will
not impute them, he saith, therefore the non-imputation of sin,
doth not argue a non being thereof in the soul, but a glorious act
of grace, imputing the sufficiency of Christ's righteousness, to
justify him that is yet ungodly.

But what blessedness doth follow the imputation of the righteousness
of Christ, to one that is yet ungodly?

Ans. Even the blessing of Abraham, to wit, grace and eternal life:
For Christ was made the curse, and death, that was due to us as
sinners; 'That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles,
through [faith in] Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise
of the Spirit through faith' (Gal 3:13,14). Now faith hath its eye
upon two things, with respect to its act of justifying. First, it
acknowledgeth that the soul is a sinner, and then, that there is
a sufficiency in the righteousness of Christ, to justify it in
the sight of God, though a sinner.

We have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law; therefore they
that believe aright, receive righteousness, even the righteousness
of another, to justify them, while yet in themselves they are
sinners.

Why do they believe in Christ? the answer is: that they might be
justified, not because in their own eyes they are. They therefore
at present stand condemned in themselves, and therefore they
believe in Jesus Christ, that they might be set free from present
condemnation. Now being justified by his blood, as ungodly, they
shall be saved by his life, that is, by his intercession: for whom
he justifieth by his blood, he saveth by his intercession; for
by that is given the spirit, faith, and all grace that preserveth
the elect unto eternal life and glory.

I conclude therefore, that you argue not gospelly, in that you so
Boldly affirm, That it would signify as little to the happiness
of one, to be justified by Christ's righteousness, while a sinner;
as would a gorgeous and splendid garment to one that is ready
to perish. For farther, thus to be justified, is meat and drink
to the sinner; and so the beginning of eternal life in him. 'My
flesh is meat indeed [said Christ] and my blood is drink indeed;
and he that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal,
or everlasting life.' He affirmeth it once again: 'As the living
Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eateth
me, even he shall live by me' (John 6:57). Here now is a man an
hungered, what must he feed upon? Not his pure humanity, not upon
the sound complexion of his soul, nor yet on the dictates of his
human nature, nor those neither, which you call truly generous
principles: but upon the flesh and blood of the Son of God, which
was once given for the sin of the world. Let those then, that would
be saved from the devil and hell, and that would find a fountain
of grace in themselves, first receive, and feed upon Christ,
as sinners and ungodly; let them believe that both his body, and
blood, and soul, was offered for them, as they were sinners. The
believing of this, is the eating of Christ; this eating of Christ,
is the beginning of eternal life, to wit, of all grace and health
in the soul; and of glory to be enjoyed most perfectly in the next
world.

Your twelfth chapter is to shew, 'That holiness being perfected is
blessedness itself; and that the glory of heaven consists chiefly
in it.'

Ans. But none of your holiness, none of that inward holiness,
which we have lost before conversion, shall ever come to heaven:
that being, as I have shewed, a holiness of another nature, and
arising from another root, than that we shall in heaven enjoy.

But further, your description of the glory that we shall possess
in heaven, is questionable, as to your notion of it; your notion
is, that the substance of it consists 'in a perfect resemblance
to the divine nature' (p. 123,124).

Ans. Therefore not in the enjoyment of the divine nature itself:
for that which in substance is but a bare resemblance, though it
be a most perfect one, is not the thing itself, of which it is a
resemblance. But the blessedness that we shall enjoy in heaven, in
the very substance of it, consisteth not wholly, nor principally,
in a resemblance of, but in the enjoyment of God himself; 'Heirs
of God.' Wherefore there shall not be in us a likeness only to,
but the very nature of God: 'Heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ' (Rom 8:17). Hence the apostle tells us, that he 'rejoiced
in hope of the glory of God' (Rom 5:2). Not only in hope of a
resemblance of it. 'The Lord is my portion, saith my soul.' But
this is like the rest of your discourse. You are so in love with
your Adamitish holiness, that with you it must be God in earth,
and heaven.

Who they are that hold, [that] our happiness in heaven shall come
by a mere fixing our eyes upon the divine perfections, I know
not: But thus I read, 'we shall be like him.' Why? or how? 'For
we shall see him as he is.' Our likeness then to God, even in the
very heavens, will in great part come by the visions of him. And
to speak the truth, our very entrance into eternal life, or the
beginnings of it here, they come to us thus, 'But we all [every
one of us that shall be saved, come by it only thus] with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord' (2 Cor 3:18).

And whereas you tell us (p. 124). That the devils themselves have
a large measure of some of the attributes of God, as knowledge,
power, &c. though themselves are unlike unto them.

In this you most prodigiously blaspheme.

Your thirteenth chapter is to show, 'That our Saviour's preferring
the business of making men holy, before any other, witnesseth,
that this is to do the best service to God.'

But still respecting the holiness, you have in your first chapter
described, which still the reader must have his eye upon, it
is false, and a slander of the Son of God. He never intended to
promote or prefer your natural old covenant holiness, viz. that
which we had lost in Adam, or that which yet from him, in the dregs
thereof, remaineth in human nature; but that which is of the Holy
Ghost, of faith, of the new covenant.

I shall not here again take notice of your 130th page, nor with the
error contained therein, about justification by imputed righteousness.

But one thing I observe, that in all this chapter you have nothing
fortified what you say, by any word of God; no, though you
insinuate (p. 129 and p. 131) that some dissent from your opinion.
But instead of the holy words of God, being as you feign, conscious
to yourself, you cannot do it so well as by another method, viz.
The words of Mr. John Smith; therefore you proceed with his, as
he with Plato's, and so wrap you up the business.

[Christ gives a new and spiritual light.]

You come next to an improvement upon the whole, where you make a
comparison between the heathens and the gospel; shewing how far
the gospel helpeth the light the heathens had, in their pursuit
after your holiness. But still the excellency of the gospel, as
you have vainly dreamt, is to make improvement first of the heathen
principles; such good principles, say you, 'as were by the light
of nature dictated to them' (p. 133). As,

1. 'That there is but one God; that he is infinitely perfect,'
&c.

2. 'That we owe our lives, and all the comforts of them to him.'

3. 'That he is our sovereign Lord.'

4. 'That he is to be loved above all things' (p. 136).

Ans. 1. Seeing all these are, and may be known, as you yourself
confess, by them that have not the gospel; and I add, nor yet
the Holy Ghost, nor any saving knowledge of God, or eternal life:
Therefore it cannot be the design of Jesus Christ by the gospel to
promote or help forward this knowledge, simply from this principle,
viz. Natural light, and the dictates of it. My reason is, because
when nature is strained to the highest pin, it is but nature
still; and so all the improvement of its light and knowledge is
but an increase of that which is but natural. 'But [saith Paul]
the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned' (1 Cor 2:14).

But the gospel is the ministration of the Spirit; a revelation of
another thing than is found in, or can be acquired by, heathenish
principles of nature.

I say, a revelation of another thing; or rather, another discovery
of the same. As, 1. Concerning the Godhead; the gospel giveth us
another discovery of it, than is possible to be obtained by the
dictates of natural light; even a discovery of a trinity of persons,
and yet unity of essence, in the same Deity (1 John 5:1,5,8).
2. The light of nature will not shew us, that God was in Christ,
reconciling the world to himself. 3. The light of nature will not
shew us, that we owe what we are, and have, to God, because we are
the price of the blood of his Son. 4. The light of nature will
not shew, that there is such a thing as election in Christ. 5. Or,
that there is such a thing, as the adoption of children to God,
through him. 6. Nor, that we are to be saved by faith in his blood.
7. Or, that the man Christ shall come from heaven to judgment.
These things, I say, the light of nature teacheth not; but these
things are the great and mighty things of the gospel, and those
about which it chiefly bendeth itself, touching upon other things,
still as those that are knowable, by a spirit inferior to this of
the gospel.

Besides, as these things are not known by the light of nature, so
the gospel, when it comes, as I also told you before, doth implant
in the soul another principle, by which they may be received,
and from which the soul should act and do, both towards God and
towards men; as namely the Holy Ghost, faith, hope, the joy of
the Spirit, &c.

The other things you mention, viz.

1. 'The immorality of the soul' (p. 138).

2. 'The doctrine of rewards and punishments in the life to come'
(p. 140).

3. 'Of the forgiveness of sin upon true repentance,' &c. (p. 142).

[4. The doctrine of God's readiness to assist men by his special
grace in their endeavours after virtue (p. 143).]

Ans. All these things may be assented to, where yet the grace of
the gospel is not, but yet the apprehension must be such, as is
the light by which they are discovered; but the light of nature
cannot discover them, according to the light and nature of the
gospel; because the gospel knowledge of them, ariseth also from
another principle: So then, These doctrines are not confirmed
by the gospel, as the light of nature teacheth them: Wherefore,
Paul, speaking of the things of the gospel, and so consequently
of these, he saith, 'Which things also we speak, NOT in the WORDS
which MAN'S wisdom teacheth, but which the HOLY GHOST teacheth;
comparing spiritual things with spiritual' (1 Cor 2:13). As if he
should say, We speak of God, of the soul, of the life to come, of
repentance, of forgiveness of sins, &c. Not as philosophers do,
nor yet in their light; but as saints, Christians, and sons of
God, as such who have received, not the spirit of the world, but
the spirit which is of God; that we may know the things that are
freely given to us of God.

But you add (for the glory of the gospel) That we have other things,
which no man could, without divine revelation, once have dreamed
of. As,

That God hath made miserable sinners the objects of such transcendent
love, as to give them his only begotten Son.

Ans. I must confess, If this one head had by you been handled
well, you would have written like a worthy gospel minister. But
you add (p. 146).

1. That when Christ was sent, it was to shew us upon what terms
God was reconcilable to us, viz. By laying 'before us all the
parts of that holiness, which is necessary to restore our natures
to his own likeness;--and most pathetically, moreover to intreat
us to do what lieth in us to put them in practice, that so it may
be to eternity well with us.' What these things are, you mention
not here; therefore I shall leave them to be spoken to under the
third head.

2. A second thing you mention is, 'That this Son of God conversed
upon equal terms with men, becoming the Son of Man, born of a
woman [a great demonstration that God hath a liking to the human
nature].' But little to the purpose as you have handled it.

3. 'That the Son of God taught men their duty, by his own example,
and did himself perform what he required of them; and that himself
did tread before us EVERY step of that way, which he hath told us
leadeth to eternal life.'

Ans. Now we are come to the point, viz.: 'That the way to eternal
life is, First of all to take Christ for our example, trading his
step': And the reason, if it be true, is weighty: 'For he hath
trod every step before us, which he hath told us leads to eternal
life.'

1. Every step. Therefore he went to heaven by virtue of an imputative
righteousness. For this is one of our steps thither.

2. Every step. Then he must go thither, by faith in his own blood
for pardon of sin. For this is another of our steps thither.

3. Every step. Then he must go thither by virtue of his own
intercession at the right hand of God, before he came thither:
For this is one of our steps thither.

4. Every step. Then he must come to God, and ask mercy for some
great wickedness, which he had committed. For this is also one of
our steps thither.

But again, we will consider it the other way.

1. Every step. Then we cannot come to heaven, before we first be
made accursed of God. For so was he before he came thither.

2. Every step. Then we must first make our body and soul an offering
for the sin of others. For this did he before he came thither.

3. Every step. Then we must go to heaven for the sake of our own
righteousness. For that was one of his steps thither.

O, Sir! What will thy gallant, generous mind do here? Indeed you
talk of his being an expiatory sacrifice for us, but you put no
more trust to that, than to Baptism, or the Lord's Supper; counting
that, with the other two, but things indifferent in themselves
(p. 6-9).

You add again, 'That this Son of God being raised from the dead,
and ascended to heaven, is our high priest there': But you talk
not at all of his sprinkling the mercy seat with his blood, but
clap upon him, the heathens demons; negotiating the affairs of men
with the supreme God, and so wrap up, with a testification that
it is needless to enlarge on the point (p. 149).

But to be plain, and in one word to tell you, about all these
things you are heathenishly dark; there hath not in these one
hundred and fifty pages one gospel truth been christianity handled
by you; but rather a darkening of truth by words without knowledge.
What man that ever had read, or assented to the gospel, but would
have spoken, yet kept within the bounds of truth, more honourably
of Christ, than you have done? His sacrifice must be stept over,
as the spider straddleth over the wasp, his intercession is
needless to be enlarged upon. But when it falleth in your way to
talk of your human nature, of the dictates, of the first principles
of morals within you, and of your generous mind to follow it: oh
what needs is there now of amplifying, enlarging, and pressing it
on men's consciences! As if that poor heathenish, pagan principle,
was the very spirit of God within us: And as if righteousness
done by that, was that, and that only, that would or could fling
heaven gates off the hinges.

Yea, a little after you tell us, that 'The doctrine of his sending
the Holy Ghost, was to move and excite us to our duty, and to
assist, cheer, and comfort us in the performance of it.' Still
meaning our close adhering, by the purity of our human nature, to
the dictates of the law, as written in our hearts as men. Which
is as false as God is true. For the Holy Ghost is sent into our
hearts, not to excite us to a compliance with our old and wind-shaken
excellencies, that came into the world with us; but to write new
laws in our hearts; even the law of faith, the word of faith and
of grace, and the doctrine of remission of sins, through the blood
of the Lamb of God, that holiness might flow from thence.

Your 15th chapter is to shew, That the gospel giveth far greater
helps to an holy life, than the Jewish ceremonies did of old. I
answer,

But the reader must here well weigh, that in the gospel you find
also some positive precepts, that are of the same nature with the
ceremonies under the law; of which, that of coming to God by Christ,
you call one, and baptism, and the Lord's supper, the other two.
So then by your doctrine, the excellency of the gospel doth not
lie in that we have a Christ to come to God by, but in things as
you feign more substantial. What are they? 'Inward principles of
holiness' (p. 159). Spiritual precepts (p. 162). That height of
virtue, and true goodness, that the gospel designeth to raise
us to: all which are general words, falling from a staggering
conscience, leaving the world, that are ignorant of his mind, in
a muse; but tickling his brethren with the delights of their moral
principles, with the dictates of their human nature, and their
gallant generous minds. Thus making a very stalking-horse of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and of the words of truth and holiness, thereby
to slay the silly one; making the Lord of life and glory, instead
of a saviour, by his blood, the instructor, and schoolmaster
only of human nature, a chaser away of evil affections, and an
extinguisher of burning lusts;[23] and that not so neither, but
by giving perfect explications of moral precepts (p. 17), and
setting himself an example before them to follow him (p. 297).

Your sixteenth chapter, containeth an answer to those that object
against the power of the christian religion to make men holy.

Ans. And to speak truth, what you at first render as the cause
of the unholiness of the professors thereof (p. 171) is to the
purpose, had it been christianly managed by you, as namely, men's
gross unbelief of the truth of it; for it 'effectually worketh
in them that believe' (1 Thess 2:13). But that you only touch and
away, neither showing what is the object of faith, nor the cause
of its being so effectual to that purpose; neither do you at all
treat of the power of unbelief, and how all men by nature are shut
up therein (Rom 11:32). But presently, according to your old and
natural course, you fall, first, upon a supposed power in men, to
embrace the gospel, both by closing with the promise, and shunning
the threatening (p. 172); farther adding, that 'mankind is endued
with a principle of freedom, and that this principle is as essential,
as any other to the human nature' (p. 173). By all which it is
manifest, that however you make mention of unbelief, because the
gospel hath laid the same in your way, yet your old doctrine of
the purity of the human nature, now broken out into a freedom of
will, and that, as an essential of the human nature, is your great
principle of faith, and your following of that, as it dictateth
to you obedience to the first principles of morals, the practice
of faith, by which you think to be saved. That this is so, must
unavoidably be gathered from the good opinion you have yourself
of coming to God by Christ; viz., That in the command thereof, it
is one of these positive precepts, and a thing in itself absolutely
considered indifferent, and neither good nor evil. Now he that
looketh upon coming to God by Christ with such an eye as this,
cannot lay the stress of his salvation upon the faith, or belief
thereof: indifferent faith, will serve for indifferent things;
yea, a man must look beyond that which he believeth is but one
with the ceremonial laws, but not the same with baptism, or the
Lord's supper; for with those you compare that of coming to God by
Christ. Wherefore faith, with you, must be turned into a cheerful
and generous complying with the dictates of the human nature; and
unbelief, into that which opposeth this, or that makes the heart
backward and sluggish therein. This is also gathered from what you
aver of the divine moral laws, that they be of an indispensable
and eternal obligation (p. 8), things that are good in themselves
(p. 9), considered in an abstracted notion (p. 10). Wherefore,
things that are good in themselves, must needs be better than those
that are in themselves but indifferent; neither can a positive
precept make that, which of itself is neither good nor evil,
better than that which in its own nature remaineth the essentials
of goodness.

I conclude then, by comparing you with yourself, by bringing your
book to your book, that you understand neither faith, nor unbelief,
any farther than by obeying or disobeying the human nature, and
its dictates in chief; and that of coming to God by Christ, as
one of the things that is indifferent in itself.

But a little to touch upon your principle of freedom, which in p.
9 you call an understanding and liberty of will.

Ans. First, That there is no such thing in man by nature, as liberty
of will, or a principle of freedom, in the saving things of the
kingdom of Christ, is apparent by several scriptures. Indeed there
is in men, as men, a willingness to be saved their own way, even
by following, as you, their own natural principles, as is seen
by the Quakers, as well as yourself; but that there is a freedom
of will in men, as men, to be saved by the way which God hath
prescribed, is neither asserted in the scriptures of God, neither
standeth with the nature of the principles of the gospel.

The apostle saith, 'The natural man receiveth not the things of
the Spirit of God.' And the reason is, not because, not principally
because, he layeth aside a liberty of will, but because 'they are
foolishness to him' (1 Cor 2:14). Because in his judgment they are
things of no moment, but things, as you [Mr. Fowler] have imagined
of them, that in themselves are but indifferent. And that this
judgment that is passed by the natural man, concerning the things
of the Spirit of God, of which, that of coming to God by Christ,
is the chief, is that which he cannot but do as a man, is evident
from that which followeth: 'neither CAN he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned.' Neither CAN he know them as a man,
because they are spiritually discerned. Now, if he cannot know
them, from what principle should he will them? For judgment, or
knowledge, must be before the will can act. I say, again, a man
must know them to be things in chief, that are absolutely, and
indispensably necessary, and those in which resteth the greatest
glory; or else his will will not comply with them, nor centre and
terminate in them as such, but still count themselves, as you,
though somewhat convinced that he ought to adhere unto them, things
that in themselves are only indifferent, and absolutely considered
neither good nor evil.

A farther enlargement upon this subject, will be time enough, if
you shall contradict.

Another reason, or cause, which you call an immediate one, of the
unsuccessfulness of the gospel, is 'men's [strange and] unaccountable
mistaking the design of it,--not to say worse, as to conceive no
better of it, than as a science, and a matter of speculation,'
&c. (p. 173).

Ans. If this be true, you have shewed us the reason, why yourself
have so base and unworthy thoughts thereof: for although coming to
God by Christ be the very chief, first, the substance, and most
essential part of obedience thereto; yet you have reckoned this but
like one of the ceremonies of the law, or as baptism with water,
and the Lord's supper (P. 7-9). Falling more directly upon the body
of the moral law, as written in the heart of men, and inclining
more to the teaching, or dictates of human nature, which were
neither of them both ever any essential part of the gospel, than
upon that which indeed is the gospel of Christ.

And here I may, if God will, timely advertise my reader, that the
gospel, and its attendants, are to be accounted things distinct:
the gospel, properly taken, being glad tidings of good things; or,
the doctrine of the forgiveness of sins freely by grace, through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. For to speak strictly,
neither is the grace of faith, hope, repentance, or newness of life,
the gospel; but rather things that are wrought by the preaching
thereof, things that are the effects of it; or its inseparable
companions, to all them that shall be saved. Wherefore the gospel
is said to be preached in all nations, for the obedience of faith
(Rom 16:26). Hope also is called the hope of the gospel, not the
gospel itself. So again, the gospel is preached that men should
repent, but it is not preached that men should gospel.

But your gospel, which principally or chiefly, centres in the dictates
of human nature; and your faith, which is chiefly a subjecting to
those dictates, are so far off from being at all any near attendants
of the gospel, that they never are urged in the New Testament,
but in order to show men they have forgotten to act as men (Rom
1:19-21, 2:14,15; 1 Cor 11:14).

Your last reason is, because of 'several untoward opinions,' the
gospel is very unsuccessful (p. 174).

Ans. But what these opinions are, we hear not; nor how to shun
them, you tell us here nothing at all. This I am sure, there are
no men in this day have more opposed the light, glory, and lustre
of the gospel of Christ, than those, as the Quakers and others, that
have set up themselves, and their own humanity, as the essential
parts of it.

You in answer to other things, add many other reasons to prove they
are mistaken that count the gospel a thing of but mean operation
to work holiness in the heart: at which you ought yourself to
tremble, seeing the Son himself, who is the Lord of the gospel,
is of so little esteem with you, as to make coming to God by him
so trivial a business as you have done.

Your large transcript of other men's sayings, to prove the good
success of the gospel of old, did better become that people and
age, than you and yours; they being a people that lived in the
power thereof, but you such bats as cannot see it. That saying
you mention of Rigaltias, doth better become you and yours: 'Those
now-a-days do retain the name, and society of Christians, which
live altogether antichristian lives. Take away publicans, and a
wretched rabble, &c. and our Christian churches will be lamentably
weak, small, and insignificant things' (p. 181).

I shall add to yours another reason of the unsuccessfulness of
the gospel in our days, and that is, because so many ignorant Sir
Johns,[24] on the one hand, and so many that have done violence
to their former light, and that have damned themselves in their
former anathematizing of others, have now for a long time, as a
judgment of God, been permitted to be, and made the mouth to the
people: persons whose lives are debauched, and who in the face of
the world, after seeming serious detestings of wickedness, have for
the love of filthy lucre, and the pampering their idle carcasses,
made shipwreck of their former faith, and that feigned good
conscience they had. From which number if you, Sir, have kept
yourself clear, the less blood of the damned will fall upon your
head: I know you not by face, much less your personal practice;
yet I have heard as if blood might pursue you, for your unstable
weathercock spirit, which doubtless could not but stumble the
weak, and give advantage to the adversary to speak vilifyingly of
religion.

[Living faith essential to salvation.]

As to your seventeenth and eighteenth chapters,[25] I shall say
little, only I wish that your eighteenth had been more express in
discovering how far a man may go, with a notion of the truth of
the gospel, and yet perish because he hath it not in power.

Only in your inveighing so much against the pardon of sin, while
you seem so much to cry up healing; you must know that pardon
of sin is the beginning of health to the soul: He pardoneth our
iniquities, and healeth all our diseases (Psa 103:3). And where
he saith, by the stripes of Christ we are healed, it is evident
that healing beginneth at pardon, and not pardon after healing,
as you would rather have it (1 Peter 2:24, compare Isa 53). As for
your comparison of the plaister, and the physician's portion,[26]
I say you do but abuse your reader, and muddy the way of the gospel.
For the first thing of which the soul is sick, and by which the
conscience receiveth wounding; it is the guilt of sin, and fear
of the curse of God for it. For which is provided the wounds and
precious blood of Christ, which flesh and blood, if the soul eat
thereof by faith, giveth deliverance therefrom. Upon this the filth
of sin appears most odious, for that it hath not only at present
defiled the soul, but because it keeps it from doing those duties
of love, which by the love of Christ it is constrained to endeavour
the perfecting of. For filth, appears filth; that is irksome, and
odious to a contrary principle now implanted in the soul; which
principle had its conveyance thither by faith in the sacrifice
and death of Christ going before. 'The love of Christ constraineth
us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were
all dead: And that he died for all, that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for
them, and rose again' (2 Cor 5:14). The man that hath received
Christ, desireth to be holy, because the nature of the faith that
layeth hold on Christ (although I will not say as you, it is of
a generous mind) worketh by love, and longeth, yea, greatly
longeth that the soul may be brought, not only into an universal
conformity to his will, but into his very likeness; and because
that state standeth not with what we are now, but with what we
shall be hereafter: therefore 'in this we groan,--being burdened
[with that which is of a contrary nature] to be clothed upon--with
our house which is from heaven' (2 Cor 5:1-8). Which state is not
that of Adam's innocency; but that which is spiritual and heavenly,
even that which is now in the Lord in heaven.

But I will descend to your nineteenth chapter, it may be more may
be discovered there.

[Justifying faith and the imputation of Christ's righteousness.]

Your nineteenth chapter is to shew; 'That a right understanding
of the design of Christianity [viz. as you have laid it down] will
give satisfaction concerning the true notion.' First, 'Of justifying
faith.' Second, 'Of the imputation of Christ's righteousness' (p.
221).

First, Of justifying faith; 'It is [say you] such a belief of the
truth of the gospel, as includes a sincere resolution of obedience
unto all its precepts.'

Ans. To this I shall answer, first, that the faith which we call
justifying faith, 'Is like precious faith' with all the elect (2
Peter 1:1), and that which is most holy (Jude 20): but those acts
of it, which respect our justification with God from the curse
of the law that is due for sin; are such, as respect not any good
work done by us, but the righteousness that resideth in the person
of Christ; and is made ours by the imputation of grace. His faith,
I say, accounteth him in whom it is, now a sinner, and without
works; yea, if he have any that in his own eyes are such, this faith
rejects them, and throweth them away; for it seeth a righteousness
in the person of Christ sufficient; even such as is verily the
righteousness of God. 'Now to him that worketh not, but believeth.'
Works and faith are put here in opposition, faith being considered
as justifying, in the sight of God from the curse. The reason
is, because the righteousness by which the soul must thus stand
justified, is a righteousness of God's appointing, not of his
prescribing us; a righteousness that entirely is included in the
person of Christ. The apostle also, when he speaks of God's
saving the election, which hangeth upon the same hinge, as this
of justification doth, to wit, on the grace of God; he opposeth
it to works; and that, not to this or that sort only, but even to
work, in the nature of work, 'If by grace, then is it no more of
works: otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then
is it no more grace: otherwise work is no more work' (Rom 11:6).
By this text, I say, the apostle doth so thoroughly distinguish
between grace and works as that which soever standeth in the case,
the other must be annihilated: If it be by grace, then must works
be no more, 'then it is no more of works': but if it be of works,
then is grace no more, 'then it is no more of grace.'

But this, notwithstanding, you urge farther; 'that faith justifieth,
as it includes a sincere resolution,' &c.

Ans. Although, as I have said before, the faith which is the
justifying faith, is that of the holiest nature, yet in the act,
by which it layeth hold of justifying righteousness, it respects
it, simply, as a righteousness offered by grace, or given unto the
person that by faith layeth hold thereon as he stands yet ungodly
and a sinner.

Faith justifieth not separate from the righteousness of Christ as
it is a grace in us, nor as it subjecteth the soul to the obedience
of the moral law, but as it receiveth a righteousness offered to
that sinner, that as such will lay hold on, and accept thereof.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, by being their
redemption, and righteousness himself (1 Cor 1:30).

But you add, 'The faith which entitles a sinner to so high a
privilege as that of justification, must needs be such as complieth
with all the purposes of Christ's coming into the world,' &c. (p.
222).

Ans. By this supposition, faith justifieth not by receiving of
the righteousness that Christ by himself accomplished for sinners;
but by falling in with all good works, which because they cannot
be known, much less done, by the soul at first, his faith being
then, as to the perfection of knowledge of duties, weak, he
standeth still before God unjustified, and so must stand until he
doth comply with all those purposes of Christ's coming into the
world.

But yet again you recall yourself, and distinguish one purpose from
the rest, as a grand one (p. 222). And that is to receive Christ
as Lord, as well as a Saviour.

Ans. 1. Although the soul that in truth receiveth Christ, receiveth
him wholly, and entirely as Christ, and not as chopt, and pulled in
pieces: yet I distinguish between the act of faith, which layeth
hold of Christ for my justification from the curse before God, and
the consequences of that act, which are to engage me to newness
of life. And indeed, as it is impossible for a man to be a new
man, before he be justified in the sight of God; so it is also
as impossible, but that when faith hath once laid hold on Christ
for life, it should also follow Christ by love. But,

2. Christ may be received at first as Lord, and that in our
justification, and yet not at all be considered as a law-giver, for
so he is not the object of faith for our justification with God,
but a requirer of obedience to laws and statutes, of them that already
are justified by the faith that receiveth him as righteousness.
But Christ is as well a Lord for us, as to, or over us; and it
highly concerneth the soul, when it believeth in, or trusteth to
the righteousness of Christ, for justification with God, to see
that this righteousness lords it over death, and sin, and the devil,
and hell for us: the name wherewith he shall be called, is, 'the
Lord our righteousness' (Jer 23:6). Our righteousness, then is
Lord, and conqueror over all; and we more than conquerors through
this Lord that loved us (Rom 8). The author to the hebrews calls
him 'King of righteousness' (Heb 7), because by his righteousness
he ruleth as Lord and King, and can reign and lord it, at all
times over all those that seek to separate us from the presence,
and glory of God.[27]

Now, how you will brook this doctrine I know not; I am sure he
stands in need thereof, that is lorded over by the curse of the
law, the guilt of sin, the rage of the devil, and the fear of
death and hell; he, I say, would be glad to know that in Christ
there is a righteousness that LORDS IT, or that Christ, as he is
righteousness, is LORD.

Wherefore reader, when thou shalt read or hear, that Jesus Christ
is Lord, if thou art at the same time under guilt of sin, and
fear of hell, then do thou remember that Christ is Lord more ways
than one, He is Lord as he is righteousness; he is Lord as he
is imputative righteousness; he is 'the Lord our righteousness'
(Jer 23:6). Of the same import is that also, 'He is a Prince,
and a Saviour,' he is a Prince, as he is a Saviour; because the
righteousness by which he saveth, beareth rule in heaven, and earth.
And hence we read again, that even when he was in the combat with
our sins, the devils, the curse, and death, upon the cross, he
even in that place 'made a shew of them openly, triumphing over
them' (Col 2:15,16). Now in these things he is Lord for us, and
the Captain of our salvation; as also in that 'He led captivity
captive' (Eph 4:8); all which places, with many more, being
testimonies to us, of the sufficiency of that righteousness which
saveth us from the justice of the law and wrath of God. But you
respect not this his manner of lording; but will have him be a
Saviour, as he giveth laws, especially those you call indispensable,
and eternal, the moral law. You would have him a Saviour, as he
bringeth us back to the holiness we had lost. But this is none
other than barbarous quakerism, the stress of their writing also
tending to no other purpose.

But you tell us, 'That you scarcely admired at any thing more in
all your life, than that any worthy men especially, should be so
difficultly persuaded to embrace this account of justifying faith,
and should perplex and make intricate so very plain a doctrine'
(p. 222).

Ans. And doubtless they far more[28] groundedly stand amazed at
such as you, who while you pretend to shew the design of the gospel,
make the very essential of it, a thing in itself indifferent, and
absolutely considered neither good nor evil (p. 7), that makes
obedience to the moral laws (p. 8), more essential to salvation,
than that of going to God by Christ (p. 9), that maketh it the great
design of Christ, to put us into a possession of that promiseless,
natural, old covenant holiness which we had lost long since in
Adam, that maketh as if Christ, rejecting all other righteousness,
or holiness, hath established only this (p. 10-16). Yea, that
maketh the very principle of this holiness to consist in 'a sound
complexion of soul, the purity of human nature in us, a habit of
soul, truly generous motives and principles, divine moral laws
which were first written in men's hearts, and originally dictates
of human nature.' All this villainy against the Son of God, with
much more as bad, is comprized within less than the first sixteen
pages of your book.

But say you, 'what pretence can there be for thinking, that faith
is the condition, or instrument of justification, as it complieth
with only the precept of relying upon Christ's merits for the
obtaining of it: especially when it is no less manifest than the
sun at noon-day, that obedience to the other precepts must go
before obedience to this; and that a man may not rely upon the
merits of Christ for the forgiveness of his sins, and he is most
presumptuous in so doing, and puts an affront upon his Saviour
too, till he be sincerely willing to be reformed from them' (p.
223).

Ans. That the merits of Christ, for justification, are made over
to that faith that receiveth them, while the person that believeth
it, stands in his own account, by the law a sinner; hath already
been shewed. And that they are not by God appointed for another
purpose, is manifest through all the bible.

1. In the type, when the bloody sacrifices were to be offered, and
an atonement made for the soul, the people were only to confess
their sins over the head of the bullock, or goat, or lamb, by
laying their hands thereon, and so the sacrifice was to be slain.
they were only to acknowledge their sins. And observe it, in the
day that these offerings were made, they were 'not to work at
all; for he that did any work therein, was to be cut off from his
people' (Lev 4, 16, 23).

2. In the antitype thus it runs; 'Christ died for our sins; Christ
gave himself for our sins; he was made to be sin for us; Christ
was made a curse for us.'

'Yea, but [say you] What pretence can there be, that faith is the
condition, or instrument of justification, as it complieth with
only the precepts of relying upon Christ's merits'; that is, first,
or before the soul doth other things.

Ans. I say, avoiding your own ambiguous terms, that it is the
duty, the indispensable duty of all that would be saved, First,
Immediately, now to close in by faith with that work of redemption,
which Christ by his blood hath purchased for them, as they are
sinners.

1. Because God doth hold it forth, yea, hath set it forth to be
received by us, as such (Rom 3:23-27).

2. Because God hath commanded us by faith to receive it as such
(Acts 16).

And I add, If the jailor was altogether ignorant of what he must
do to be saved, and Paul yet bids him then, before he knew anything
else, 'Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and he should be saved,'
that then believing, even believing on Christ for a righteousness
to justify and save him, must go first, and may, nay ought to be
pressed, even then, when the soul stands ignorant of what else he
ought to do (Acts 16:30-32).

'But [you say] It is evident as the sun at noon-day, that obedience
to the other precepts must go before obedience to this, that is,
before faith in Christ.'

Ans. This you say; but Paul said to the ignorant jailor, that knew
nothing of the mind of God in the doctrine of justification, that
he should first believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and so should
be saved. Again, when Paul preached to the Corinthians, the first
doctrine that he delivered unto them was, 'That Christ died for
their sins, according to the scriptures,' &c. (1 Cor 15:1-3).

But what be these other precepts? Not Baptism, nor the supper
of the Lord; for these you say are, as poor and inconsiderable,
as that of coming to God by Christ, even all three, things in
themselves neither good nor evil, but of an indifferent nature;
they must be therefore some more weighty things of the gospel,
than these positive precepts. But what things are they? It is good
that you tell us, seeing you tacitly forbid all men upon pain of
presumption and of doing affront to Jesus Christ, that they rely
not on the merits of Christ for forgiveness till they be sincerely
willing to perform them first; yet I find not here one particular
precept instanced by you: But perhaps we shall hear of them hereafter,
therefore now I shall let them pass. You tell us farther, 'That
such a reliance [as that of acting faith, first, on the merits
of Christ for justification] is ordinarily to be found amongst
unregenerate, and even the worst of men' (p. 223).

Ans. This is but a falsehood and a slander, for the unregenerate
know him not; how then can they believe on him? (1 John 3:1).
Besides, the worst of men, so far as they pretend religion, set
up your idol in their hearts, viz. their own good meanings, their
own good nature, the notions and dictates of their nature, living
that little which they do live upon the snuff of their own light,
the sparks of their own fire, and therefore woe unto them.

But you add, 'How can it be otherwise, than that that act of faith
must needs have a hand in justifying, and the special hand too,
which distinguisheth it from that which is to be found in such
persons.'

Ans. 1. There is no act of faith doth more distinguish true faith
from false, and the Christian from the painted hypocrite, than
that which first lays hold on Christ, while the person that hath
it stands in his own esteem, ungodly; all over like yourself,
being fearful and unbelieving (Rev 21:8) despisers, who wonder,
and perish (Acts 13:40-41).

2. And this faith, by thus acting, doth more subdue sin, though it
doth not justify as subduing, but as applying Christ's righteousness,
than all the wisdom and purity of human nature, or the dictates
of that nature that is found in the whole world.

But you add farther: 'What good ground can men have for this fancy,
when as our Saviour hath merited the pardon of sin for this end,
that it might be an effectual motive to turn from it?'

Ans. Although you speak this in great derision to faith when it
worketh right, yet know that therefore (seeing you would hear it)
I say, therefore hath our Saviour merited pardon, and bestowed it
on men freely, and bid them believe or receive it, and have it;
that thereby they might be encouraged to live to him, and love him,
and comply with his commandments. 'For scarcely for a righteous
man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man some would even
dare to die: But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then, being
NOW justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through
him' (Rom 5). Now, as here we are said to be justified by his blood,
that is, as his blood appeaseth the justice of God; so again, it
is said that this blood is set forth by God for us to have faith
in it, by the term of a propitiation. 'Whom God hath set forth
to be a propitiation [or a sacrifice to appease the displeasure
of God] through faith in his blood.--To declare at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him
which believeth in Jesus' (Rom 3:25,26).

Again, As we are thus justified by blood in the sight of God, by
faith in it, so also it is testified of his blood, that it sprinkleth
the conscience of the faithful, but still only as it is received
by faith. But from what is the conscience sprinkled, but from those
dead works that remain in all that have not yet been justified
by faith in this blood. Now if faith in this blood doth sprinkle
the conscience, and so doth purge it from all dead works, then
must faith go first to the blood of Christ for justification,
and must bring this home to the defiled conscience, before it be
delivered from those dead works that are in it, and made capable
of serving the living God (Rom 5:7-10, 3:24,25; Heb 9:14, 10:19-22).

But you say, 'you will never trust your discursive faculty so long
as you live, if you are mistaken here' (p. 224).

Tell not me of your discursive faculty: The word of God is plain.
And never challenge man, for he that condemneth your way to heaven,
to the very pit of hell, as Paul doth, can yet set forth a better.

Second, I come now to the second thing, viz. the doctrine of the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, which you thus expound.

'It consists in dealing with sincerely righteous persons, as if
they were perfectly so, for the sake, and upon the account of
Christ's righteousness' (p. 225, 226).

Ans. 1. Any thing but truth; but I would know how sincerely righteous
they were that were justified without works? Or how sincerely
righteous they were whom God justified as ungodly? (Rom 4:3-5).

2. Your explication of the imputation of Christ's righteousness
makes it respect our works rather than our persons: 'It consists
[say you] in dealing with sincerely righteous persons, as if
they were perfectly so': That is, it justifieth their imperfect
righteousness first, and so secondarily their persons for the sake
of that.

But observe a few things from this explication.

1. This concludeth that a man may be sincerely righteous in God's
account, WITHOUT the righteousness of Christ; for that is to be
imputed to such, and none but such.

2. This concludeth that men may be sincerely righteous, before
Christ's righteousness is imputed: For this sincere righteousness
is precedent to the imputation of Christ's.

3. This concludeth that a man may have true, yea saving grace
in great and mighty action in him, before he hath faith in the
righteousness of Christ. For if a man must be sincerely righteous
first; then he must not only have that we call the habit, but the
powerful acts of grace.

Besides, if the righteousness of Christ is not to be looked to
first, but secondarily; not before, but after we be made sincerely
righteous; then may not faith be thus acted if a man should have
it, until he be first a sincerely righteous person.

4. This concludeth that a man may be brought from under the curse
of the law in God's sight, before he have faith in the righteousness
of Christ, yea before it be imputed to him: for he that in God's
account is reckoned sincerely righteous, is beloved of his God.

5. This concludeth that a man may be from under the curse of God,
without the imputation of the righteousness of Christ: For if a
man must be sincerely righteous in God's account without it, then
he is from under the curse of God without it.

6. This doctrine teacheth farther, that Christ came to call, and
justify the righteous, contrary to his express word. In short,
by this account of things, first we must be healed, and then the
plaister comes.

Yea, so confident is this man in this his assertion, that he saith,
'It is not possible any other notion of this doctrine should have
truth in it' (p. 226). O this Jesus! This rock of offence! But he
that believeth on him shall not be confounded.

But blessed be God for Jesus Christ, and for that he took our
nature, and sin, and curse, and death upon him: And for that he
did also by himself, by one offering purge our sins. We that have
believed have found rest, even there where God and his Father hath
smelled a sweet savour of rest; because we are presented to God,
even now complete in the righteousness of him, and stand discharged
of guilt, even by the faith of him: yea, as sins past, so sins
to come, were taken up and satisfied for, by that offering of the
body of Jesus, we who have had a due sense of sins, and of the
nature of the justice of God, we know that no remission of the guilt
of any one can be, but by atonement made by blood (Heb 9:22). We
also know that where faith in Jesus Christ is wanting, there can
be neither good principle, nor good endeavour. For faith is the
first of all graces, and without it there is nothing but sin (Rom
14:23). We know also, that faith as a grace in us, severed from
the righteousness of Christ, is only a beholder of things, but
not a justifier of persons, and that if it lay not hold of, and
applieth not that righteousness which is in Christ, it carrieth
us no farther than to the [faith of] devils. We know that this
doctrine killeth sin, and curseth it at the very roots; I say we
know it, 'who have mourned over him whom WE have pierced' (Zech
12:10), and who have been confounded to see that God by his blood
should be pacified towards us for all the wickedness we have done
(Eze 16:63). Yea, we have a double motive to be holy and humble
before him; one because he died for us on earth, another because
he now appears for us in heaven, there sprinkling for us the
mercy seat with his blood, there ever-living to make intercession
for them that come unto God by him. 'If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is
the propitiation for our sins' (1 John 2:1,2). Yet this worketh
in us no looseness, nor favour to sin, but so much the more an
abhorrence of it: 'She loveth much, for much was forgiven her'
(Luke 7:47). Yea, she weeps, she washeth his feet, and wipeth
them with the hairs of her head, to the confounding of Simon the
pharisee, and all such ignorant hypocrites.

[The Bible the only measure and standard of truth.]

But I pass this, and come to the twentieth chapter, which is to
learn us by what measure and standard we are to judge of doctrines;
and that is by the design of Christianity as stated, you must
know, by Mr. Fowler. Wherefore it will be requisite here again,
that a collection of principles and doctrines be gathered out of
this book, that the man that hath a short memory may be helped the
better to bear them in mind, and to make them, if he shall be so
bewitched by them, instead of the Bible, a standard for truth,
and a rule for him to obtain salvation by.

First then, he must know that the principle by which he must walk
must be the purity of the human nature, a divine or God-like nature,
which yet is but an habit of soul, or more plainly the moral law,
as written in the heart, and originally the dictates of human
nature, a generous principle, such an one as although it respects
law, yet acts in a sphere above it; above it as a written law,
that acts even in the first principles of it (p. 7-10).

Second, He must know, that the holiness Christ designed to possess
his people with, is that which we had lost in Adam, that which he
had before he fell, that natural old covenant Christ-less holiness
(p. 12).

Third, He must put a difference between those laws of the gospel
that are essential to holiness, and those positive precepts that
in themselves are indifferent, and absolutely considered neither
good nor evil; but must know also that of these positive precepts,
he alloweth but three in the gospel, but three that are purely
such; to wit, that of coming to God by Christ, the institutions
of baptism, and the Lord's supper (p. 7-9).

Fourth, He must hold for certain, that the faith which entitleth
a sinner to so high a privilege as that of justification, must
needs be such as complieth with all the purposes of Christ's
coming into the world, whether at present it understands them or
not, and it is no less necessary it should justify as it doth so
(p. 222).

Fifth, He must know, that a man may not rely upon the merits of
Christ for the forgiveness of his sins, before he have done other
good works first (p. 223).

Sixth, And that the right explication of the imputation of Christ's
righteousness is this, that it consisteth in having to do with
persons that are sincerely righteous (p. 225). For it is not
possible for Christ's righteousness to be imputed to an unrighteous
man (p. 120).

These things, with many like to them, being the main points by this
man handled, and by him asserted to be the design of Christianity,
by these we must, as by a rule and standard, understand how to
judge of the truth of doctrines. And, saith he, 'seeing the design
of Christianity is to make men holy, [still meaning from principles
of humanity, and by possessing us again, with the often repeated
holiness which we had lost,] whatsoever opinions do either directly,
or in their evident consequences, obstruct the promoting of it,
are perfectly false' (p. 227,228).

Ans. Thus with one word, as if he were Lord and Judge himself, he
sendeth to the pit of hell, all things that sanctify or make holy
the hearts of men, if they oppose the design of his christianity.
But what if the Holy Ghost will become a principle in the hearts
of the converted, and will not now suffer them to act simply and
alone upon the principles of pure humanity; or what now if faith
will become a principle to act by, instead of these that are
originally dictates of human nature? Or what if a man should act
now as a son, rather than simply as a creature endued with
a principle of reason? I question here whether these things thus
doing do not obstruct, put by, yea and take the way[29] of his
pure humanity, dictates of human nature, and instead thereof act
and govern the soul by and with their own principles. For albeit,
there be the dictates of human nature in the sons of men, yet
neither is this nature, nor yet the dictates of it, laid by Jesus
Christ as the truly christian principles in his. But you add:

'Those doctrines which in their own nature do evidently tend to
the serving of THIS design of Christianity, we may conclude are
most true and genuine' (p. 229).

Ans. The holiness which you so often call the design of Christianity,
being by yourself said to be that which we had lost, for this one
sentence is it on which your whole book is built (p. 12), whatsoever
doctrine or doctor it be that asserts it, both that doctrine
is of the devil, and that doctor an angel of darkness, or rather
a minister of Satan, become as a minister of righteousness. For
where is it said in all the whole book of God, that ever the Lord
Christ designed, yea made it his errand from heaven, to put us
again in possession of the holiness which we had lost? Yet this
you affirm, and tell us the business of your book is to prove it.
But blessed be God, your shifts are discovered, and your fig-leaves
rent from off you, and the righteousness or holiness so much cried
up by you, proved to be none of the holiness of the gospel, but
that which stood with perfect ignorance thereof. I might speak to
what yet remains of falsehood, in the other part of this chapter;
but having overthrown the foundation, and broken the head of your
Leviathan; what remains falleth of itself, and dieth of its own
accord.

What you say of modes or forms, and sticklers for little trifles,
such as place their religion in mere externals, you may fasten
them where of due they belong: Yet I tell you the least of the
commandments of Christ is better than your Adamitish holiness.

[The necessity of a sound foundation.]

Your twenty-first chapter tells us, if we will believe you, how
we shall judge of the necessity of doctrine, to be embraced
or rejected; also you say, it giveth us a brief discourse of the
nature of fundamentals: But because your discourse of them is
general, and not any one particularized, I might leave you in your
generals till you dealt more candidly, both with the word of God
and your abused reader.

First, Indeed you tell us of primary fundamentals. 'Such, as without
the knowledge and belief of which it is impossible to acquire
that inward righteousness and true holiness which the christian
religion aimeth at;--but the particulars of these, say you,
I shall not enumerate, because [as will appear from what will be
said anon] it is not needful to have a just table of them' (p.
234).

Ans. Deep divinity! (1.) They are such as without the knowledge
and belief of them, it is not possible we should acquire your true
holiness; and yet for all that, it is not needful that we be told
what they are, or that we should have a just table of them. (2.)
But if they be things necessary, things without the knowledge of
which it is impossible we should be truly holy, then is it needful
that we understand what they are: yea, then is it needful that they
be written, and presented one by one unto us, that our knowledge
of them being distinct and full, we may the better be able to
obtain or acquire your glorious (so pretended) holiness.

But I know your primary fundamentals, they are your first principles
of morals; not faith in the righteousness of Christ, for that
is comprehended in your positive, and in themselves indifferent
things: your morals are the things in themselves absolutely
necessary; of an indispensable and eternal obligation (p. 8,9).
But,

Second, You tell us of points of faith that are secondarily fundamental;
the disbelief of which cannot consist with true holiness, in those
to whom the gospel is sufficiently made known.

Ans. The secondary fundamentals also, are all kept close and hid,
and not otherwise to be understood, but by implication; however,
the disbelief of these is not of so sad a consequence as is that
of the former, because, say you, 'They are not in their own nature,
holiness' (p. 235). Yea, he insinuateth that the disbelief of
them may stand with true holiness in those to whom the gospel is
not sufficiently made known.

Of these secondary fundamentals therefore, whatever is their
number, this is one, even coming to God by Christ; for as in p.
7 and 9 he calleth it a positive precept, a thing that in itself
is neither good nor evil; so here he speaks of such as are not in
their own nature holy; not such, as that holiness is not in some
degree or other attainable without the belief of them.

That one of these secondary fundamentals intended by Mr. Fowler,
is, that of coming to God by Christ, I farther gather, because he
saith, that 'in the number of these, are all such doctrines, as
are with indisputable clearness revealed to us,' that is, by the
holy scriptures of the New Testament (p. 235). For therein is this
revealed to be a fundamental; but he saith, not a primary one,
because, that in itself, it is but indifferent, and not in its own
nature good. 'Now the belief of these, saith he, though it is not
in itself any more, than in higher or lower degrees, profitable,
[confusions! darkness! confusion!] yet it is absolutely necessary
from an external cause': That is, with such abundant clearness,
as that nothing can cause men to refuse to admit them, but that
which argueth them to be stark naught.

Ans. Then, hence it seems that the reason why you admit these
secondary sort of fundamentals, is not from any internal power,
but an external declaration only. 2. Nay, and you do but admit
them neither, and that too, for some external cause; not because
of the worthiness of the nature of the points themselves. 3. And
were it not, but that you are loth to be counted stark naught in
the eyes of men, so far as I can discern, you would not at all
make profession of them, with pretence as unto God; for, say you,
'We must take notice here, that all such points [as these][viz.
these fundamentals,] are not of equal necessity to be received by
all Christians, because, that in regard of the diversity of their
capacities, educations, and other means and advantages, some of
them may be most plainly perceived by some, to be delivered in
the scriptures, which cannot be so by others, with the like ease.'

Ans. From these words I take notice of four things.

1. That by this universal (all Christians) is comprehended the
Heathen and Pagan people, they give heed to, and mind to follow
that light, that originally, and naturally, stirreth them to moral
duties. These be they that want the education, and advantages
of others, and are not in such a capacity, as they to whom these
things are delivered by the scriptures.

2. That this people, notwithstanding they want a scripture revelation
of these secondary fundamentals, yet have the more necessary, the
first sort of fundamentals; for the secondary sort, say you, are
not in their own nature such, as that holiness is not in some
degree or other attainable without the belief of them.

3. That therefore, these secondary sort of fundamentals, are only
necessary to be believed by them that have the indisputable (the
scripture) revelation of them; and that, in truth, the others may
be saved without them.

4. But yet, even those that are made capable, by education and other
advantages, to obtain the belief of them, ought, notwithstanding,
not to have the same respect for them, as for those of the first
sort of fundamentals, because they are not in their own nature
such.

But will this man know, that Christ is not only a fundamental,
but the very foundation of all other fundamental truths, revealed
both in the Old Testament and the New; and that his pure human nature,
with the dictates of it, with his feigned Adamitish holiness, is
no fundamental at all; I mean no fundamental of faith, no gospel
fundamental (1 Cor 3:14; Eph 2:19,20). Yea, will he know, that
from heaven there is none other name given, than the name of Jesus
Christ, whereby we must be saved, none other name given under the
whole heavens (Acts 4:12).

Oh the witchcrafts, by which some men's spirits are intoxicated!
and the strength of delusion, by which some are infatuated, and
turned aside from the simplicity that is in Jesus Christ! But I
proceed:

Your great question, or rather your Urim and Thumim, by which you
would have all men make judgment of their saveable, or damnable
state(p. 236) is, according to your description of things, most
devilish and destructive. For to obey God and Christ in all things,
with you, is to do it from principles purely human in the faith
of this: that Christ hath designed to possess us again with that
holiness we had lost. Again, to obey God and Christ, with you,
is, so to obey all their laws, as respecting the first principles
of morals; and our obedience to them, far more indispensable than
that of coming to God by Christ. Farther, he that obeys them in
all things, with your directions, must not look upon faith in the
blood of Christ, and justification by his righteousness, as the
main and first, but the second part of our duty; other commands,
or precepts, more naturally holy and good, first being embraced,
and lived in the practice of, by us.

This, I say, being the doctrine you have asserted, and the foundation
on which your Urim and Thummim stands; the foundation, with your
trial, are both from the devil and hell, as hath at large been
proved, and discovered in this book.

And I now will add, and bid you take your advantage, that should a
man with all his might, strive to obey all the moral laws, either
as they are contained in the first principles of morals, or in
the express decalogue, or Ten Commandments; without faith, first,
in the blood, and death, and resurrection of Christ, &c. For his
justification with God; his thus doing would be counted wickedness,
and he in the end, accounted a rebel against the gospel, and shall
be damned for want of faith in the blood of the Lord Jesus.

[The Christian's great principles.]

Your twenty-second chapter, saith, 'That the design of Christianity,
teacheth us what doctrines and practices we ought, as Christians,
to be most zealous for, or against' (p. 237).

Ans. But there is not by that, it being rightly stated, one
syllable that tendeth to encourage any man, to have lower thoughts
of coming to God by Christ, than of keeping the moral law. For
even the first text you bring, doth utterly overthrow it. 'Contend
[earnestly], say you, for the faith'; I answer then, not for the
law of works, for the law is not of faith; but the man that doth
these things, shall live in them, by them. 'Contend earnestly for
the faith, for there are certain men crept in unawares, which were
before of old, ordained unto this condemnation'; even the condemnation
that is to come upon them that contend against the faith; for
these ungodly men turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, and
deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Now these
creeping ungodly men, may be divided in three ranks.

1. Such as by principle, and practice both, say, 'Let us do evil,
that good may come: whose damnation is just' (Rom 3:8).

2. Such as by practice only, appear to be such, denying to profess
the principle thereof, such are they that made excuse and delay,
when invited to come to the wedding (Matt 22:1-5; Luke 14).

3. There is yet another sort; and they are such as seem to deny
it, both in principle, and practice also; only they do it covertly,
PRIVILY bringing in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them. These 'bring upon themselves swift destruction' (2
Peter 2:1).

This third sort, made of the doctrine of grace, and of the forgiveness
of sins, through the faith of the righteousness of Christ, a loose
and licentious doctrine, or a doctrine that giveth liberty to the
flesh. By reason of these the way of truth is evil spoken of, and
the hearts of innocent ones alienated therefrom. These will not
stick to charge it upon the very chief of the brethren, if they
shall say, 'As sin abounded, grace hath much more abounded: that
they press men to do evil, that good may come of it' (Rom 3:8,9).
But, as I said, these vilify Christ, not with open words, but
covertly; privily they bring in their blasphemy under a cloak,
crying, the law, holiness, strictness, good works, &c. Besides,
these clothe their doctrines with names and notions that belong
not at all unto them; as of Christ, grace, the spirit, the gospel,
when there is only there, the devil, and his angels, and errors;
as angels of light, and ministers of righteousness. Of this last
sort are you, and the subject matter of your book; for you bring
into the world an anti-gospel holiness, anti-gospel principles,
and anti-gospel fundamentals; and that these things might be
worshiped by your disciples, you give them the name of holiness,
the design of Christ, and of Christianity; by which means you remove
the Christ of God, from before, and set him behind, forbidding
men to believe on him, till they have practised your things first:
nay, after they have practised yours, they then must come to God
by him, still respecting the principles and dictates of humanity, as
things of the greatest weight, things that are good in themselves;
still considering that 'coming to God by Christ, is not good in
itself, but so only upon the account of certain circumstances; a
thing in itself of an indifferent nature, and absolutely considered
neither good nor evil.'

Wherefore, Sir, laying aside all fear of men, not regarding what
you may procure to be inflicted upon me for this my plain dealing
with you, I tell you again, that yourself is one of them, that
have closely, privily, and devilishly, by your book, turned the
grace of our God into a lascivious doctrine, bespattering it with
giving liberty to looseness, and the hardening of the ungodly in
wickedness, against whom, shall you persist in your wickedness, I
shall not fail, may I live, and know it, and be helped of God to
do it, to discover yet farther the rottenness of your doctrine,
with the accursed tendencies thereof.

What you say about 'doubtful opinion, alterable modes, rites, and
circumstances in religion' (p. 239). I know none so wedded thereto
as yourselves, even the whole gang of your rabbling counterfeit
clergy; who generally like the ape you speak of,[30] lie blowing
up the applause and glory of your trumpery, and like the tail,
with your foolish and sophistical arguings, you cover the filthy
parts thereof, as you sweetly argue in the next chapter (p. 242)
saying, 'Whatsoever of such are commended by the custom of the place
we live in, or commanded by superiors, or made by any circumstance
convenient to be done, our christian liberty consists in this,
that we have leave to do them.'[31] So that do but call them things
indifferent, things that are the customs of the place we live in,
or made by ANY circumstance convenient, and a man may not doubt but
he hath leave to do them, let him live at Rome or Constantinople,
or amidst the greatest corruption of worship and government. These
are therefore doubtless, a third sort of fundamentals, by which
you can wrestle with conviction of conscience, and stifle it; by
which you can suit yourself for every fashion, mode, and way of
religion. Here you may hop from Presbyterianism, to a prelatical
mode; and if time and chance should serve you, backwards, and
forwards again: yea, here you can make use of several consciences,
one for this way now, another for that anon; now putting out the
light of this by a sophistical delusive argument, then putting
out the other, by an argument that best suits the time.[32] Yea,
how oft is the candle of the wicked put out, by such glorious
learning as this. Nay, I doubt not, but a man of your principles,
were he put upon it, would not stick to count those you call
gospel-positive precepts, of no value at all in the christian
religion; for now, even now, you do not stick to say that, that
even that of going to God by Christ, is one of these, and that
such an one, as if absolutely considered in itself, is neither
good nor evil. How then, if God should cast you into Turkey,
where Mahomet reigns as Lord? It is but reckoning that it is the
religion, and custom of the country, and that which is authorized
by the power that is there; wherefore it is but sticking to your
dictates of human nature, and remembering that coming to God by
Christ is a thing of an indifferent nature in itself, and then for
peace sake, and to sleep in a whole skin, you may comply, and do
as your superior commands. Why? Because in Turkey, are your first
sort of fundamentals found: there are men that have human nature,
and the law of morals written in their hearts; they have also the
dictates thereof written within them, which teach them, those you
call the eternal laws of righteousness; wherefore you both would
agree in your essential, and immutable differences of good and
evil (p. 6), and differ only about these positive laws, indifferent
things. Yea, and Mahomet also for the time, because by a custom
made convenient, might be now accounted worshipful, and the
circumstances that attend his worship, especially those of them
that clash not with the dictates of your human nature, might also
be swallowed down.

Behold you here then, good reader, a glorious Latitudinarian, that
can, as to religion, turn and twist like an eel on the angle; or
rather like the weather-cock that stands on the steeple.

'For [saith he] our refusing to comply with either of these can
hardly proceed from anything better than a proud affectation
of singularity, or at best, from superstitious scrupulosity' (p.
2424).

Do but believe him therefore in what he saith, and you cannot
choose but be ready with him to comply with all modes that may
serve for advantage.

Besides, he saith, 'that the word superstition, in the Greek implieth,
a frightful, and over-timorous apprehension of the divine nature;
and consequently a base and under-valuing conception of it.'

So that to be tender of conscience, especially in things of divine
worship, binding up the soul to the words of the everlasting
testament, in such things especially, as a fool can call little,
and insignificant trivial matters, rendereth a man such an one as
hath a very erroneous conscience.

But he would not be understood (p. 244) as if he here intended
to vilify things that are plainly commanded, or to tolerate that
which is plainly forbidden, only he would have all things that may
fall within the reach of these two general heads, be examined by
this general rule, 'HIS description of the design of Christianity.'

Ans. But I could tell him, that whatsoever is imposed as a part of
God's worship, is judged by a better rule than his, both as to its
goodness and badness, neither can we account any thing indifferent
that is a part thereof. Besides, whatsoever is reputed a part of
God's worship, layeth hold on the conscience of the godly: although
a ranting Latitudinarian may say, 'If the devil should preach,
I would hear him, before I would suffer persecution.' As a brave
fellow which I could name, in his zeal was pleased to declare.

But what trust should any man put to the rule to which you direct
him for help, and relief therein; seeing that from the beginning
to the end, from the top to the bottom, it is a cursed blasphemous
book; a book that more vilifieth Jesus Christ, than many of the
Quakers themselves: for which of them said worse of him, and make
coming to God by him, a more insignificant thing, than you by your
pretended design of Christianity have done.

We have therefore a more sure word of the prophets, to the which
'we do well to take heed' (2 Peter 1:19), by which, both your
doctrine, and practice, is already judged to be naught, as will be
farther discovered time enough, when you shall justify or condemn
particulars.

Your twenty-fourth chapter I shall now pass by, until I can better
compare you and popery, against which you there so stoutly[33]
diggle together.

[The scandalous lives and foolish doctrines of state priests, not
the true ground of dissent.]

Your twenty-fifth chapter carrieth in it an hideous outcry against
many of your ministers and guides, complaining and confessing, 'That
no one thing hath so conduced to the prejudice of your church of
England, and done the separating parties so much service, as the
scandalous lives of some that exercise the ministerial function
in her' (p. 258).

Ans. I will grant it, if you respect these poor carnal people,
who yet have been shamed from your assemblies, by such vicious
persons you mention: but the truly godly, and spiritually judicious
have left you from other arguments, of which I shall not here
dilate.

But from p. 261 to the end of the chapter, you take upon you to
particularize other of your ministers that are an offence to you,
and to the design of your Christianity.[34]

1. 'Such as affect to make people stare at their high flown bombast
language, or to please their phantasies with foolish jugglings,
and pedantic or boyish wit; or to be admired for their ability in
dividing of an hair, their metaphysical acuteness, and scholastic
subtilty, or for their doughty dexterity in controversial squabbles.'
And I add, had you joined herewith, such as vilify and trample
upon the blood of the Lord Jesus, preferring the snivel of their
own brains before him, you had herein but drawn your own picture,
and given your reader an emblem of yourself.

2. The second sort you blame, are 'such as seek to approve themselves
to their auditories to be men of mysteries, and endeavour to
make the plain and easy doctrines of the gospel as intricate and
obscure as ever they are able.' I will add to these, such as take
away the doctrine of faith, and that set themselves and their
works in the room thereof: such as have sought to overturn the
foundation, Jesus Christ, and have made coming to God by him, in
itself of a far more indifferent nature than the dictates of our
humanity.

3. Another sort (you say) are 'such as preach upon free grace,
and christian privileges, otherwise than as motives to cite to
obedience, and never scarce insist upon any duties, but those of
believing, laying hold on Christ's righteousness, applying the
promises, and renouncing our own righteousness,' which they that
have none at all to renounce, have a mighty kindness for.

Ans. (1.) Who they are that preach free grace in your church, to
excite men to uncleanness, you may know better than I. But if these
words, otherwise than to cite men to obedience, be thus thrust in,
of purpose thereby to speak evil of the preachers of free grace,
and the exalters of the imputed righteousness of Christ, then look
to it; for such venom language as this, doth but involve you within
the bowels of that most dreadful prophecy, concerning the false
prophets of the last days, that shall privily bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them.

(2.) The preaching of free grace, pressing to believing, and laying
hold on Christ's righteousness, is the most available means under
heaven, to make men holy, and righteous:[35] 1. Before God. 2.
Then before men.

(3.) The preaching of these are first, and principally to beget
faith, to beget life, to beget souls to God; yea, to beget in
men such a principle, whereby they may serve God acceptably, with
reverence and godly fear.

(4.) But to preach free grace, doth much condemn your free will;
to preach Christ's righteousness doth utterly curse, and condemn
yours; and to preach the promise of grace, doth quite shut out a
covenant of works: therefore no marvel if you, who are so wedded
to these things, be such an enemy to free grace, the righteousness
of Christ, and the gospel promises, that you make even these things
a characteristical note (first abusing the consequences of them)
of a church-troubling preacher.

(5.) You tauntingly proceed, saying, 'such preachers also press
us to renounce our own righteousness, which they that have none
at all to renounce, have a mighty kindness for.'

Ans. Indeed those that have a righteousness of their own, as the
pharisees, and hypocrites of old, had never much kindness for the
doctrine of grace, and the ministers of Christ, but the publicans
and harlots had: and therefore, these, while they that had
righteousness stumbled and fell, entered into the kingdom of heaven.
'The publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before
you.' But what righteousness have you of your own, to which you
so dearly are wedded, that it may not be let go, for the sake of
Christ? seeing also so long as you go about to establish it, you
submit not yourself 'to the righteousness of God' (Rom 10:3).
Yea, why do you taunt those ministers that persuade us to renounce
our own righteousness, and those also that follow their doctrine?
Seeing this was both the doctrine and practice of Paul and all
others, save only those that had Moses' veil over their hearts.

Another sort of ministers that you say are enemies to the promoting
of holiness, are such as 'are never in their element, but when
they are talking of the irrespectiveness of God's decrees, the
absoluteness of his promises, the utter disability and perfect
impotence of natural men, to do any thing towards their own
conversion, and that insist with great emphasis, and vehemence,
upon such like false, and dangerous opinions' (p. 262).

Ans. The men that preach these things, being rightly stated, preach
the truth of God, if the scriptures may bear sway; they having
all been proved the truth of the gospel, both by the prophets and
apostles: and when you shall think meet by argument to contradict
them, either I, or same other may show you the folly of your
undertaking. In the mean time let the reader take notice that here
you have judged not by scripture, nor by reason, but upon a bare
presumption, arising from your pride or ignorance. Wherefore pray
you in your next, shew us, (1.) What is in man that the decree of
election should respect as a thing foreseen of God, to prevail
with him to predestinate him to eternal life by Jesus Christ our
Lord. (2.) Make it manifest that in the word of God there neither
is, nor can be any absolute promise contained. (3.) Shew us what
ability there is in a natural man, as such, to do things towards
his own conversion; I mean things immediately tending to, and that
must infallibly consummate therein, and let us see what things
they are. And know that when you have well done all this, according
to the scriptures of truth, that then it will be time enough to
condemn the contrary for false, and dangerous opinions.

But shall I speak the truth for you? The reason of this your
presumptuous exclamation, and condemnation of these things; is
because they stand in the way of promoting your ignorant, tottering,
promiseless, and gospelless holiness; they stand in the way
of old Adam, they stand in the way of your dunghill rebellious
righteousness, they stand in the way of your freedom of will,
and a great rabble more of such like pretended virtues. Yea, they
do, and must, and shall stand there, when you and the rest of the
Socinians, and Quakers, have said their all against them.

There is yet another sort of preachers whom you condemn, and so do
I as well as you, though not in your spirit, nor to advance your
pestiferous principles: and they are 'such as make it their great
business, to advance the petty interest of any party whatsoever,
and concern themselves more about doing this, than about promoting,
and carrying on that, wherein consists the chief good of all mankind,
and are more zealous to make proselytes to their particular sects,
than converts [I will add first to Jesus Christ, and then] to an
holy life; and press more exact and rigid conformity to their modes
and forms, than to the laws of God, and the essential duties of
the christian religion' (p. 263).

Lastly, The caution which you give to ministers, because there
wanteth for it, among you a foundation, is to be esteemed but an
error, and an abuse of the words, and practices of the apostle.
And as for your subtil and close incensing the power to persecute
Nonconformists, know that we are willing, God assisting, to overcome
you with truth and patience, not sticking to sacrifice our lives,
and dearest concerns in a faithful witness-bearing against your
filthy errors, compiled and foisted into the world, by your devilish
design to promote Paganism, against Christianity (p. 265,266).

[A compliant temper may prove dangerous.]

I come now to your twenty-sixth chapter, which is spent to prove,
'That an obedient temper of mind, is a necessary and excellent
qualification to prepare men for a firm belief, and a right
understanding of the gospel of Christ' (p. 267).

Ans. 1. Forasmuch as the obedient temper you mention, is precedent
to, or before, faith, and the right understanding of the gospel,
it must needs be also, that which stands with unbelief, and
ignorance of the same. Now that this should be an excellent, and
necessary qualification, to a firm belief, and right understanding
of the gospel, is altogether without proof, and truth. But this
is affirmed for the farther promoting of your human nature, and
the things that originally are dictates thereof. But,

2. The obedience, or inclination to obedience, that is before faith,
or the understanding of the gospel, is so far off from being an
excellent preparative, or good qualification for faith, and the
knowledge of the gospel, that in its own nature, which is more
than in its consequences, it is a great obstruction thereto.

For, while a man remains faithless and ignorant of the gospel, to
what doth his obedient temper of mind incline? Not to faith, nor
the gospel of Christ; for with these, as yet you suppose he hath
not to do; therefore he inclineth to the law of morals, either
as it was delivered in tables of stone from Sinai, or as written
in the hearts of all the children of men, to it, under the last
consideration, which is in truth, the most heathen and pagan to
it, as so you intend, your obedient temper of mind should incline
(p. 7-10).

Now this doctrine, being in itself of quite another nature than
the doctrine of faith, and also, as such, a covenant by itself,
it requireth the mind by virtue of its commands, to stand to THAT,
and to rest in that; for of necessity, the heart and mind of a man
can go no farther than it seeth, and hath learnt, but by this moral
doctrine, the heart and mind is bound and limited to itself, by
the power of the dictate to obedience, and the promise of obtaining
the blessing, when the preceptive part of it is fulfilled. Hence
Paul tells us, that though that ministration, that was written,
and engraven in stones, (which in nature is the same with this)
is glorious, yet these imperfections attended the man that was in
it (2 Cor 3).

1. He was but within the bounds of the ministration of death.

2. In this estate he was blind, and could not see how to be delivered
therefrom: 'The vail is over their heart,' so that they could not
heretofore, neither can they now, see to the end of that which
was commanded, neither to the perfection of the command, nor their
own insufficiency to do it, nor to the death and curse of God,
that attended him, that in every thing continued not in [all] that
was written in the book of the law to do them.

3. Every lecture, or reading of this old law, is as a fresh
hood-winking of its disciples, and a doubling of the hindrance of
their coming to Christ for life. 'But their minds were blinded,
for until this day, remaineth the same vail untaken away in reading
of the old testament; which vail is done away in Christ. But even
unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their hearts'
(2 Cor 3:14,15).

And let the reader note, that all these things attend the doctrine
of morals: the ceremonies being in themselves more apt to instruct
men in the knowledge of Christ, they being by God's ordination,
figures, shadows, representations, and emblems of him; but the morals
are not so, neither, as written in our natures, nor as written and
engraven in stones (Gal 3:24). Wherefore, your so highly commended
obedient temper of mind, you intending thereby an hearty compliance
before faith, with morals for righteousness, is so far off from
being an excellent temper, and a necessary qualification, to help
a man to a firm belief, and right understanding of the gospel;
that it is the most ready way of all ways in the world, to keep a
man perpetually blind, and ignorant thereof. Wherefore the apostle
saith, that the vail, the ignorance, cannot be taken away, but
when the heart shall turn to the Lord, that is, from the doctrine
of morals, as a law and covenant in our natures, or, as it was
written and engraven in stones, to Christ for mercy to pardon
our transgressions against it, and for imputative righteousness
to justify us from it. While Moses is read, the vail is over the
heart; that is, while men with their minds stand bending also to
do it. But mark, when it, the heart, shall turn to the Lord, or
to the word of the gospel, which is the revelation of him, then
the vail shall be taken away.

And hence it will not be amiss, if again we consider how the
Holy Ghost compareth, or setteth one against another, these two
administrations.

The law he calls the letter, even the law of morals, that law
that was written and engraven in stones. The other ministration,
he calls the ministration of the spirit, even that which Christ
offered to the world, upon believing.

Again, he denieth himself to be a minister of the law of morals.
He hath made us able ministers of the New Testament, not of the
letter, or law; but of the spirit or gospel. The reason is, for
the letter, or law, can do nothing but kill, curse, or condemn;
but the spirit, or the gospel, giveth life. Farther, in comparing,
he calls the law, the ministration of death, or that which layeth
death at the doors of all flesh; but the gospel, the ministration
of righteousness, because, by this ministry, there is a revelation
of that righteousness that is fulfilled by the person of Christ;
and to be imputed for righteousness to them that believe, that
they might be delivered from the ministration of death. How then?
Hath the ministration of God no glory? Yes, forasmuch as it is a
revelation of the justice of God against sin. But yet again, its
glory is turned into no glory, when it is compared with that which
excelleth. 'But if the ministration of death, written and engraven
in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not
stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance;
which glory was to be done away; how shall not the ministration of
the Spirit be rather glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation
be glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed
in glory. For even that which was made glorious had no glory in
this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth' (2 Cor 3:7-10).

So then, your obedient temper of mind, forasmuch as it respecteth
the law of morals, and that too, before faith, or a right
understanding of the gospel, is nothing else but an obedience to
the law, a living to death, and the ministration of condemnation;
and is a persuading the world, that to be obedient to that
ministration, that is not the ministration of the gospel, but
holdeth its disciples in blindness and ignorance, in which it
is impossible Christ should be revealed, is an excellent, yea,
a necessary qualification to prepare men for a firm belief, and
a right understanding of the gospel of Christ, which yet even
blindeth, and holdeth all blind that are the followers of that
ministration. I come now to your proof, which indeed is no proof
of this anti-gospel assertion, but texts abused, and wrested out
of their place, to serve to underprop your erroneous doctrine.
The first is, 'If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself'
(John 7:17, p. 268).

Ans. This scripture respecteth not at all the moral law, or obedience
to the dictates of human nature, as an acceptable qualification
precedent to faith; or that, for the sake of which God will give
men faith in, and a right understanding of the gospel, but is
itself an immediate exhortation to believing, with a promise of
what shall follow; as who shall say, The Father hath sent me into
the world to be salvation to it, through faith in my blood: My
Father's will therefore is, 'that men believe in me'; and if any
will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, he shall feel
the power thereof, by the peace and comfort that will presently
possess the soul, and by the holy effects that follow.

That this is the true exposition of this place will be verified
if you consider, that to do the will of God, in a New Testament
sense, is to be taken under a double consideration. 1. As it
respecteth Christ. 2. Man.

1. As it respecteth Christ, so it concerns his completing the
redemption of man by himself, by his own personal performances
(John 6:38,39; Heb 10:5-10).

2. As it respecteth man, it doth first and immediately respect
our believing on him for remission of sins and eternal life. 'And
this is the will of him [the Father] which sent me [saith Christ]
that every one that seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have
everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day' (John
6:40). This then is the will of God; that men do believe in Jesus
Christ.

Against, when the Jews asked Jesus Christ what they should do,
that they might work the works of God, he did not send them first
to the moral precept, or to its first principles in the hearts of
men; by obeying that, to fit themselves for faith; but immediately
he tells them, 'This is the work of God, that ye believe on him
whom he hath sent' (John 6:29). This is the work of God; that
is, 'This is his commandment, That we should believe on the name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us
commandment' (1 John 3:23). If any man will do his will, he shall
know of the doctrine, that is, as I have said, he shall feel, and
have the authority of this faith in his heart, both to give peace
and joy in his heart, and assurance, and the sealing of his soul
to glory. For all these things come in upon believing first in
Christ.

1. 'By faith we have peace with God' (Rom 5:1).

2. 'We have joy and peace through believing' (Rom 15:13).

3. 'Assurance comes also through believing' (John 6:69; Heb 10:22).

4. Yea, and the sealings up to eternal life; 'In whom also after
that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise'
(Eph 1:13).

5. Sanctification, and a right obedient temper, is not to be found
in men before, but after they have believed; 'He purified their
hearts by faith' (Acts 15:9). Yea, heaven and eternal happiness
is promised to them who are sanctified by faith which is in Christ
(26:18).

This first text, therefore, hath been by you abused, in that you
have ungodlily strained it, but in vain, to make it warrant your
heathenish preparations to faith.

The second scripture; 'He that is of God heareth God's words; ye
therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God' (John 8:47).

Ans. This scripture supposeth men must first be of God, before they
can hear God's word; before they can hear it with the hearing of
faith; and therefore nothing respecteth those that before they
have faith, live in the law of works; and least of all, those that
become obedient thereto, that thereby they may obtain everlasting
life. For these are not of God, not of him in a New Testament
sense; not sons, because they are born of men, of the will of men,
of the law, and according to the wisdom of flesh and blood (John
1:12,13).

Your third scripture is, 'And as many as were ordained to eternal
life believed' (Acts 13:48). Which text you thus expound: 'That as
many of the Gentiles as were disposed, or in a ready preparedness
for eternal life, believed; that is, those which were proselytes
of the gate, who were admitted by the Jews to the hope of eternal
life, and to have their portion in the age to come, without
submitting to their whole law, or any more than owning the God of
Israel, and observing the seven precepts of Noah' (p. 269)[36].

Ans. 1. That obedience to the moral law is not a preparative to
faith, or an excellent and necessary qualification to the right
understanding of the gospel I have proved.

2. That to be a Jewish proselyte was to live in the faith of
Messias to come, is the strain of all the scriptures that have to
deal with them.

3. But that ordaining men to eternal life respects an act of the
Jews, or that the Jews did dispense with the Gentile proselytes,
in their casting off all their laws, but the seven precepts of
Noah.

4. Or that God counted this a fit, or forerunning qualification
to faith in Jesus Christ, neither stands with the word of God,
nor the zeal of that people.

5. Besides, the words presently following seem to me to insinuate
more, viz. That the Jews and religious proselytes that adhered
to Paul at his first sermon (v 43), did contradict and blaspheme
at his second (v 45), and moreover, that it was they that raised
persecution upon him, and expelled him out of their coasts (v 50).
When the Gentiles, even those that were more barbarously ignorant
at his coming, when they heard that by Christ there was offered to
them the forgiveness of sins, they believed (v 48), and glorified
the word of the Lord: The wisdom of heaven so disposing such of
their hearts, that were before by HIM, not by Jews ordained to
life. 'And as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.'

But you come again, in p. 269 to the scripture first urged by you,
'If any man will do his will,' &c. and you tell us, that this must
also needs be implied, he shall rightly understand the doctrine
too; which word (understand) you so carry, as may best help you
in case you should meet with an adversary. As if any should thus
object, that here you have granted that the words make promise of
an understanding of the gospel; yea require in it the very first
act of the will; then you readily shift it by saying, That this is
implied only, suggesting that obedience to morals is expressed,
and therefore must first be thought on and done. But if one of
your brotherhood stop here, and make the objection; then you add,
'It is knowledge, at least, in all the necessary points thereof,
absolutely necessary and essential parts, from among which you
long since did cast out, "Coming to God by Jesus Christ."' Yea you
add, 'That by [that which you call] the design of the gospel, it
may be presumed, that whosoever considereth it, with a design of
being so, [that is, of living up to human principles, and that
desireth to be possessed again of the holiness he hath lost, for
that is it for the proof of which you have written above 300 pages]
he must needs believe the gospel to have come from God, and also
be enlightened in the true knowledge of at least the necessary
points of it,' viz. All moral duties contained therein, which are
never a one of them as such an essential of the gospel, but are
such duties as are consequential to the belief thereof.

Wherefore, although you feign it, 'this honest temper,' as you
call it, will not help you, 1. To judge of the gospel without
prejudice; nor 2. To evidence it with satisfaction; nor 3. Secure
those in whom it is from error and delusion; no man being more
brutish or heathenish, nor so void of satisfaction about it, nor
more involved in error concerning it, than yourself; being truly
what you charge upon others; 1. Grossly ignorant; 2. Too highly
opinionate; 3. Proud in affectation; 4. Liquorish; 5. A self-lover;
6. And for your blasphemy under the just judgment of God. 'If our
gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: In whom the god
of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine into them' (2 Cor 4:3,4).

['For me to live is Christ' includes in it more than good habits
or holy frames of soul.]

I am come now to your last chapter, which tells us wherein the
essence and life of Christianity consisteth, viz. In a good state
and habit of mind, in a holy frame and temper of soul (p. 282).

Ans. 1. It consisteth in a life of faith, when I live in the belief
of this, that Christ loved me, and gave himself for me. 'The life
that I now live in the flesh [saith Paul] I live by the faith of
the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.'

2. And besides, a good state and habit of mind, or an holy frame
and temper of soul, in your notion of them, which respecteth purely
obedience to morals, from natural impulses, or dictates of our
humanity, they are rather heathenish than Christian, and being
alone, end in death rather than life. 'As many as are of the
works of the law, are under the curse,' he saith not they that
sin against it, but they that are OF the works of it, such as do
justice, righteousness, charity, goodness, mercy, patience, and
all kind of moral duties, from principles human, natural, or as
men, they are under the curse, because they have sinned first, and
also are infirm and weak in their pursuit after the perfections
they desire. These follow after righteousness, but that flies
from them; wherefore they do not obtain it, because they seek it
not by faith in Christ, but as it were by the works; the righteous,
good, and holy works of the law (Rom 9:30,32). But you add,

'It is such a habit of mind, such a frame and temper of soul, as
esteemeth God as the chiefest good, and preferreth him and his
Son Jesus Christ before all the world, and that prizeth above all
things an interest in the divine perfections,' &c. (p. 282).

Ans. 1. God must needs be esteemed the chiefest good, by all that
have but, and are ruled by, the light of nature, because they see
him by his works to be almighty, merciful, and eternal (Rom 1:20).
But this may be where the knowledge of the man, the Mediator is
not; therefore this, in this and in your sense, cannot be of the
essence of Christianity, for that it is common to all the world.
That estimation of God which is common to natural men, cannot be
of the essence of Christianity, because they want that knowledge
of him that comes by Jesus Christ, and so are not capable to esteem
of him under a Christian consideration.

But you say, 'it is that good habit and temper of mind that
preferreth God, and his Son Jesus Christ, before all the world.'

Ans. He that esteemeth God above all, must needs, at least in his
judgment, so prefer him; but whereas you add, and his Son Jesus
Christ, you put in them words but as a cloak, for yourself have
not preferred his Son Jesus Christ, no, not before a moral law, no
not before your obedience to it, although but by human principles;
yea, you have accounted the command of God, by which we are
enjoined by him to come to God, a thing in itself but like levitical
ceremonies, or as Baptism and the Lord's Supper; a thing in itself
indifferent, and absolutely considered neither good nor evil (p.
7,8,9).

You add; 'It is such a temper as prizeth above all things, an
interest in the divine perfections; such as justice and righteousness,
universal charity, goodness, mercy, patience, and all kinds of
purity' (p. 282).

Ans. Seeing by these expressions you only intend moral virtues,
and those that are inherent in you, and originally operations of
humanity, it is evident that you have but impiously and idolatrously
attributed to your own goodness so high and blessed a title. For
whatsoever is in your nature, and originally the dictates thereof,
and whatsoever proficiency you make therein by human principles,
and helps of natural endowments; these things are but of yourself,
your own justice, your own righteousness, your own charity,
goodness, mercy, patience, kindness, &c. Now to call these the
divine perfections, when they are only your own human virtues,
bespeaks you, I say, fond, impious, and idolatrous, and shews you,
in the midst of all your pretended design to glorify God, such an
one who have set up your own goodness with him, yea and given it
the title of his blessed grace and favour.

That scripture you mention (Rom 14:17), although by the word
righteousness there, is intended obedience to the moral law, yet
to it by persons already justified by Christ's righteousness; hence
they are said to do it in the joy and peace of the Holy Ghost,
or by the joy and peace which they had by faith in Christ's
righteousness, as revealed to them by the Spirit of God. Hence
again, they are said in IT to serve Christ, or to receive the law
at his hand, which he giveth to them to walk after, having first
justified them from the curse thereof by his blood.

2. The law was given twice on Sinai, the last time, with a proclamation
of mercy going before, and he that receiveth it thus, receiveth
it after a gospel manner. For they as justified persons are dead
to the law as a covenant of works by the body of Christ, that they
might live to another, even to him that is raised from the dead
(Rom 7; Gal 2:19). But you by this scripture intend not this
doctrine, for you make justification by Christ, come after, not
before obedience to the law; yea, you make obedience thereto,
the essential, and coming to God by Christ, but a thing of a more
remote nature, from true and substantial gospel-righteousness.

In p. 283, you speak again of the old principle, and thus you
comment, 'A principle of holiness that respecteth duty, as with
respect to the nature of the command, so not with respect to the
duty as occasioned by certain external inducements and motives,
but from a good temper and disposition of soul.'

Ans. This I say, still respecting your old principle of humanity,
and the purity of your nature, the most amounts but to this: Your
principle is confined to a liberty of will and affections, with
respect to doing of the law of works, which many have professed
to have, and do before you, and yet have come short of the glory
of God. For as I told you before, I tell you now again, that the
gospel-principles are the Holy Ghost and faith, which help that
soul in whom they dwell to count believing in Jesus Christ the
great and essential part of our Christianity, and our reckoning
ourselves pardoned for the sake of him: 'And thus being set free
from sin, we become the servants of God, and have our fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life' (Rom 6:22).

Your description of a child of Abraham, you meaning in a New
Testament sense, is quite beside the truth. For albeit, the sons
of Abraham will live holy lives, and become obedient to the
substantial laws; yet it is not their subjection to morals, but
faith in Jesus, that giveth them the denomination of children of
Abraham. 'Know ye, therefore, that they that are of faith are the
children of faithful Abraham: They that are of faith, the same are
the children of Abraham: Yea, they that are of faith are blessed
with faithful Abraham' (Gal 3:7,9). In p. 284, you say, 'That
there is no one duty more affectionately recommended to us in the
gospel than is alms-giving.'

Ans. Yes, That there is, and that which more immediately respecteth
our justification with God, than ten thousand such commandments;
and that is faith in Christ. Alms-deeds is also a blessed command;
yet but one of the second table, such as must flow from faith going
before. Faith I mean that layeth hold on Christ's righteousness,
if it be accepted of God. For before the heart be good the action
must be naught; now the heart is good by faith, because faith, by
applying Christ's righteousness, makes over [a] whole Christ to
the soul, of whose fulness it receiveth, and grace for grace (John
1:16). Many things in this last chapter are worthy reprehension,
but because you tell us, in the last two pages thereof, is the
sum of all that need to be said, I will immediately apply myself
to what is there contained.

You say (p. 296), 'It is not possible we should not have the design
of Christianity accomplished in us, and therefore that we should
be destitute of the power of it, if we make our Saviour's most
excellent life the pattern of our lives.' By our Saviour's life,
as by a parenthesis you also express, you mean, as yourself hath in
short described it (ch 5) viz., 'The greatest freedom, affability,
courtesy, candour, ingenuity, gentleness, meekness, humility,
contempt of the world, contention, charity, tenderness, compassion,
patience, submission to the divine will, love of God, devoutest
temper of mind towards him, mighty confidence and trust in God,'
&c.

Ans. Our Saviour's life, in not only these, but all other duties
that respected morals, was not principally or first to be imitated
by us, but that the law, even in the preceptive part thereof,
might be fully and perfectly fulfilled for us. 'Christ is the end
of the law for righteousness'; the end, not only of the ceremonial
law, but the ten commandments too; for if the word righteousness,
respecteth in special them. 'Jesus increased in favour with God'
(Luke 2:52; Matt 3:17). This respecteth him as made under the law,
and his pleasing of God in that capacity. So also doth that, 'In
him I am well pleased.' Now I say, as Jesus stood in this capacity,
he dealt with the law in its greatest force and severity, as it
immediately came from God, without the advantage of a Mediator, and
stood by his perfect complying with, and fulfilling every tittle
thereof. Besides, as Jesus Christ had thus to do with the law,
he did it in order to his 'finishing transgression, and putting
an end to sin' (Dan 9:24), and so consequently as Mediator, and
undertaker for the world. For his perfect complying withal, and
fulfilling every tittle of the law, respected nothing his own
private person, that he for himself might be righteous thereby;
for in himself he was eternally just and holy, even as the Father,
but it respected us, even us. For US he was made under the law,
that we, by his fulfilling the law, might by him be redeemed from
under the law, and also receive the adoption of SONS (Gal 4:4,5).
For we having sinned, and transgressed the law, and the justice of
God, yet requiring obedience thereto, and the law being too weak
through our flesh to do it, God therefore sent his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, who himself for us did first of all
walk in the law, and then for sin suffered also in his flesh, the
sentence, and curse pronounced against us by the law. For it was
nothing less necessary, when the Son of God became undertaker
for the sin of the world, that he should walk in obedience to the
whole of the precepts of the law, to deliver us from the judgment
of the law; I say it was no less necessary he should so do, than
that he should bear our curse and death. For it would have been
impossible for him to have overcome the last, if he had not been
spotless touching the first. For therefore it was impossible he
should be holden of death, because he did nothing worthy of death;
no, not in the judgment of the law, to which he immediately stood.
Now as Christ Jesus stood thus to, and walked in the law, it is
blasphemy for any to presume to imitate him; because thus to do is
to turn Mediator and undertaker for the sin of the world. Besides,
whoso doth attempt it, undertakes an impossibility; for no man can
stand by the moral law, as it immediately comes from the divine
majesty; he having sinned first, even before he goeth about to
fulfil it. And in this sense is that to be understood, 'as many as
are of the works of the law are under the curse,' held accursed,
because they have sinned first; accursed in their performances,
because of imperfection, and therefore assuredly accursed at last,
because they come short of the righteousness thereof.

1. Christ Jesus did never set himself forth for an example, that
by imitating his steps in morals should obtain justification with
God from the curse of that law; for this would be to overthrow,
and utterly abolish the work which himself came into the world to
accomplish, which was not to be our example, that we by treading
his steps might have remission of sins, but that through the faith
of him, through faith in his blood, we might be reconciled to God.

2. Besides, thus to imitate Christ, is to make of him a Saviour, not
by sacrifice, but by example. Nay, to speak the whole, this would
be to make his mediatorship wholly to center, rather in prescribing
of rules, and exacting obedience to morals, than in giving himself
a ransom for men; yea, I will add to imitate Christ, as you have
prescribed, may be done by him, that yet may be ignorant of the
excellency of his person, and the chief end of his being made
flesh: For in all these things which you have discoursed in that
fifth chapter of him, you have only spoken of that, something of
which is apprehended by the light of nature; yea, nature itself will
teach that men should trust in God, which is the most excellent
particular that there you mention. Wherefore our Lord Jesus himself
foreseeing, that in men there will be a proudness, to content
themselves with that confidence, he intimateth that it would be
in us insignificant, if it stand without faith in himself. 'Ye
believe [naturally] in God [saith he] believe also in me' (John
14:1). Faith in Jesus is as absolutely necessary as to believe
immediately in the divine being. Yea, without faith in Jesus,
whosoever believeth in God is sure to perish and burn in hell.
'If you believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins' (John
8:24). And to take Jesus in morals for example, is nowhere called
believing in him, neither is there one promise of eternal life,
annexed to such a practice. But you say, 'If we tread in his blessed
steps, and be such, according to our measure and capacity, as we
have understood he was in this world' (p. 296).

Ans. I say, for a man to confine himself only to the life of the
Lord Jesus, for an example, or to think it enough to make him,
in his life, a pattern for us to follow, leaveth us, through our
shortness in the end, with the devil and his angels, for want of
faith in the doctrine of remission of sins; for Christ did nowhere
make another mediator between God and him, nor did he ever trust
to another man's righteousness, to be thereby justified from the
curse of the law; neither did he at all stand in need thereof,
without which, we must be damned and perish. Now I say, these
things being nowhere practised by him, he cannot therein be an
example to us. And I say again, seeing that in these things, by
faith in them, is immediately wrapped up our reconciliation with
God; it followeth, that though a man take the Lord Christ in
his whole life, for an example in the end, that notwithstanding,
he abideth unreconciled to God. Neither will that clause, 'and
be such,' help such a person at all: For justification with God,
comes not by imitating Christ as exemplary in morals, but through
faith in his precious blood. In the law I read, that the Paschal
Lamb was neither to be eaten sodden nor raw, but roast with fire,
must it be eaten (Exo 12). Now to make salvation principally to
depend upon imitating Christ's life, it is to feed upon him raw,
or at most, as sodden, not sanctified and holy: But the precept
is, 'Eat it roast with fire'; is to be the antitype, as accursed
of God for sin, and enduring the punishment for it (Exo 19; Deu
33:2; Mal 4:1). The law is compared to fire, and its curse to
a burning oven. Now under the curse of this fiery law, was the
Lord Jesus afflicted for the sins of the world: wherefore, as so
considered, our faith must lay hold upon him, for justification
with God. 'This is the law of the burnt-offering: [which was the
offering for sin;] It is the burnt-offering, because of the burning
upon the altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the
altar shall be burning in it' (Lev 6:9). But now I would inquire:
Had Israel done the commandment, if they had eaten the passover
raw, or boiled in water? Or if they had offered that offering, that
was to be burnt as a sin-offering, otherwise than it was commanded?
Even so, to feed upon Christ, as he is holy, and of good life only;
and also, as taking him therein for an example to us, to follow
his steps for justification with God; this is, to eat the passover
raw, and not as roast with fire; this is, to feed upon Jesus,
without respecting him as accursed of God for our sin, and so
consequently to miss of that eternal life, that by his blood he
hath obtained for every one that believeth on him. I have been
pleased with this observation: That none of the signs and wonders
in Egypt, could deliver the children of Israel thence, till the
Lamb was slain, and roast with fire (Exo 12:31). And I have been
also pleased with this: That the Father, not Moses, gave the manna
from heaven, which was a type of the flesh, and blood of Christ,
that whoso feedeth on, shall live for ever (John 6:32). Yea,
circumcision also, which was a type of inward, and heart-holiness,
was not of Moses, but of the Fathers, and principally a consequence
of the faith of Abraham (John 7:22). Whence I gather, that no
wonder, but the blood of Christ can save; that no kindness, but
the mercy of God, can give this to us; and that no law, but the
law of faith, can make us truly holy in heart. But you add, 'Those
that sincerely, and industriously, endeavour to imitate the holy
Jesus in his Spirit and actions, can never be ignorant what it is
to be truly Christians.' Those that follow Jesus in his Spirit, must
first receive that Spirit from heaven, which Spirit is received,
as I have often said, by applying first, by faith, the merits of
Christ to the soul, for life and justification with God. The Spirit
is not received by the works of the law, but by the hearing of
faith; neither comes it in the ministry, or doctrine of morals,
but in and by the ministry of faith; and the law is not of faith.
Wherefore seeing you have, in p. 223 of your book, forbidden sinners
to come first to Jesus for justification with God; the Spirit you
talk of, however you call it the Spirit of Jesus, can be no other
than the spirit of a man; which you also yourself, in p. 7, 8, 9
call 'the purity of human nature, a principle of reason, the first
principles of morals, or those that are originally dictates of
human nature.' Wherefore by these words, 'in his Spirit,' you do
but blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and abuse your ignorant reader;
calling now, Quaker-like, the dictates of your humanity, and
your Socinian compliances therewith, the Spirit of Holy Jesus. I
conclude therefore, that the way of salvation, or the design of
Christianity as prescribed by you, is none other than the errors of
your own brain, the way of death, the sum and heart of Papistical
Quakerism, and is quite denied by the Lord Jesus, and by his blessed
Testament. And now go your ways, and imitate the Lord Jesus, and
take the whole history of his life for your example, and walk in
his steps, and be such as much as you can, yet without faith in
his blood, first; yea, and if you stand not just before God through
the imputation of his righteousness, your imitating will be found
no better than rebellion, because by that, instead of faith in his
blood, you hope to obtain remission of sins, thrusting him thereby
from his office and work, and setting your dunghill righteousness
up in his stead.

[Fowler's false and dangerous conclusions.]

I come now to your conclusion. First, in p. 298 'You press men
to betake themselves to find [that which you call] the design of
Christianity, accomplished in their hearts and lives.'

Ans. Seeing that the holiness that your erroneous book has exalted,
is none other but that which we have lost; yea, and again, seeing
you have set this in the head of, and before the righteousness of
Christ, I admonish my reader to tremble at the blasphemy of your
book, and account the whole design therein, to be none other but
that of an enemy to the Son of God, and salvation of the world.
For that holiness as I have shewed, is none other but a shadowish,
Christless, graceless holiness; and your so exalting of it, very
blasphemy. You proceed, saying, 'Let us exercise ourselves unto
real and substantial godliness; [still meaning your Adamitish
holiness] let us study the gospel not to discourse, or only to
believe, but also, and above all things, to do well.'

Ans. Herein still you manifest, either ignorance of, or malice against,
the doctrine of faith; that doctrine, which above all doctrines,
is the quintessence of the New Testament, because therein, and
not principally, as you feign, by doing well, is the righteousness
of God revealed, and that from faith to faith; not from faith to
works, nor yet from works to faith. Besides, the gospel is preached
in all nations, for the obedience of faith (Rom 16:26). Neither
works, the law, the dictates of humanity, nor the first principles of
morals, knowing what to do with the righteousness of the gospel,
which is a righteousness imputed by God, not wrought by us;
a righteousness given, not earned, a righteousness received by
believing, not that which floweth from our obedience to laws, a
righteousness which comes from God to us, not one that goeth from
us to God. Besides, as I also have hinted before, the apostle and
you are directly opposite. You cry, 'above all things, do well':
that is, work and do the law; but he, 'above ALL, take the shield
of faith, wherewith are quenched all the fiery darts of the wicked'
(Eph 6:16).

But you add (p. 300), 'Let us do what lieth in us to convince our
Atheists, that the religion of the blessed Jesus, is no trick or
device; and our wanton and loose Christians, that it is no notional
business, or speculative science.'

Ans. This you cannot do by your moral natural principles of humanity:
For even some of your brave philosophers, whose godliness you have
so much applauded, were even then in the midst of their, and your
virtues, atheistically ignorant of the religion of Jesus. And as
to the loose Christian; Christ neither hath need of, nor will he
bless your blasphemous opinions, nor feigned godliness, but real
ungodliness, to make them converts to his faith and grace, neither
can it be expected it should, seeing you have not only dirty
thoughts, but vilifying words, and sayings of his person, work,
and righteousness. you have set your works before his (p. 223),
calling them substantial, indispensable, and real; but coming to
God by him, a thing in itself indifferent (p. 7-9). You go on, and
say, 'Let us declare--that we are not barely reliers on Christ's
righteousness, by being imitators of it' (p. 300). You cannot leave
off to contemn and blaspheme the Son of God. Do you not yet know
that the righteousness of Christ on which the sinner ought to rely
for life, is such, as consisted in his standing to, and doing of
the law, without a Mediator? And would you be doing this? What know
you not, that an essential of the righteousness he accomplished
for sinners when he was in the world; is, 'That he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost, born without sin, did all things in the power
of, and union with his own eternal Godhead.' And are you able
thus to imitate him? Again, the righteousness on which we ought
to rely for life, is that which hath in it the merit of blood:
we are 'justified by his blood' through faith in his blood (Rom
5:9). Is this the righteousness you would imitate? Farther, the
righteousness on which poor sinners should rely, is that, for the
sake of which God forgiveth the sins of him that resteth by faith
thereupon. But would you be imitating of, or accomplishing such
a righteousness?

Your book, Sir, is begun in ignorance, managed with error, and
ended in blasphemy.

Now the God of glory, if it may stand with his glory, give you a
sight of your sins, against the Son of God, that you may, as Saul,
lie trembling, and being astonished, cry out to be justified, with
the righteousness of God without the law, even that which is by
faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe.

Many other gross absurdities, which I have omitted in your whole
book, may perhaps, be more thoroughly gathered up, when you shall
have taken the opportunity to reply. In the meantime I shall
content myself with this.

'Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world'
(John 1:29).

'Even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come' (1 Thess
1:10).

'Who when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right
hand of the Majesty on high' (Heb 1:3).

'Christ died for our sins' (1 Cor 15:3).

'God hath made him to be sin for us' (2 Cor 5:21).

'Christ was made a curse for us' (Gal 3:13).

'He bare our sins in his own body on the tree' (1 Peter 2:24).

'He loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood' (Rev
1:5).

'God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you' (Eph 4:32).

'We have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace' (Eph 1:7).

Now unto the King, eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
God, be honour, and glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.


THE CONCLUSION.

That my reader may farther perceive that Mr. Fowler, even by the
chief of the articles of the church of England, is adjudged
erroneous; and besides the very fundamentals of the doctrine of
Jesus Christ, and that in those very principles that are in the
main, I say, and that most immediately concern Christ, faith,
and salvation, will be evident to them that compare his design of
Christianity, with these articles hereunto recited.

The Article [X.] concerning Free-will.

'The condition of man, after the fall of Adam, is such, that he
cannot turn and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and
good works, to faith, and calling upon God: wherefore we have no
power to do good works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without
the grace of God by Christ preventing[37] us, that we may have a
good will, and working with us, when we have that good will.'

The Article [XI.] concerning Justification.

'We are accounted righteous before God, ONLY for the merit of
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, by faith; and not for our own
works, or deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by faith
ONLY, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of comfort,'
&c.

The Article [XIII.] of Works before Justification.

'Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of
his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring
not of faith in Jesus Christ,--or deserve grace of congruity: yea
rather, for that they are not done as God hath willed and commanded
them to be done, we doubt not but they have the NATURE of sin.'

These articles, because they respect the points in controversy
betwixt Mr. Fowler, and myself; and because they be also fundamental
truths of the christian religion, as I do heartily believe, let
all men know that I quarrel not with him, about things wherein I
dissent from the church of England, but do contend for the truth
contained, even in these very articles of theirs, from which he
hath so deeply revolted, that he clasheth with every one of them,
as may farther be shewn when he shall take heart to reply.

But to wind up this unpleasant scribble, I shall have done when
I have farther shewed, how he joineth with papist, and quaker,
against these wholesome, and fundamental articles.

Mr. Fowler's Doctrine compared with Campian the Jesuit, upon that
question whether Faith only justifieth: saith Campian,

1. Campian. 'We [Papists] say, that as grace is put into us in
justification, so also our righteousness is enlarged through good
works, and is inherent in us; therefore it is not true that God
doth justify by faith ONLY.'

Fowler (p. 221), 'Justifying faith is such a belief of the truth
of the gospel, as includes a sincere resolution of obedience unto
all its precepts: and that it justifieth as it doth so.--In short,
is it possible that faith in Christ's blood, for the forgiveness
of sins, should be the only act which justifieth a sinner?' (p.
224).

2. Campian. 'So that faith is urged, but not faith ONLY; again,
by faith is meant all Christianity, and the whole religion of
Christians.'

Fowler (p. 222), 'For surely the faith which entitles the sinner
to so high a privilege, as that of justification, must needs be
such as complieth with all the purposes of Christ's coming into
the world; especially with his grand purpose,--as Lord, and that
it is no less necessary that it should justify as it doth this.'

3. Campian. 'Though works void of Christ are nothing; yet through
grace they serve to justification.'

Fowler (p. 225,226), 'Of the imputation of Christ's righteousness,--this
is the true explication; it consists in dealing with sincerely
righteous persons: as if they were perfectly so, for the sake
and upon the account of Christ's righteousness. The grand intent
of the gospel being to make us partakers of an inward and real
righteousness; and it being but a secondary one, that we should
be accepted, and rewarded, as if we were completely righteous.'

4. Campian. 'Speaking of faith, hope, and charity, he confesseth;
that faith in nature is before them, but it doth not justify before
they come.'

Fowler (p. 223), 'What pretence can there be for thinking, that
faith is the condition, or instrument of justification, as it
complieth with only the precept of relying on Christ's merits, for
the obtaining of it: especially when it is no less manifest than
the sun at noon-day, that obedience to the other precepts, [or
works of love,] must go before obedience to this' (p. 284).

5. Campian. 'I deny [that faith ONLY doth justify] for you have
not in all the word of God, that faith only doth justify.'

Fowler (p. 225), 'And for my part, I must confess, that I would
not willingly be he that should undertake to encounter one of the
champions of that foul cause, with the admission of this principle,
that faith justifieth, only as it apprehendeth [resteth or relieth
on (p. 224)] the merits, and righteousness of Jesus Christ, I must
certainly have great luck, or my adversary but little cunning, if
I were not forced to repent me of such an engagement.'

6. Campian. 'Abraham being a just man, was made more just by a
living faith.'

Fowler (p. 283), 'He only is a true child of Abraham, who in the
purity of the heart obeyeth those substantial laws, that are
imposed by God, upon him.'

7. Campian. 'I say that charity and good works, are not excluded
[in the causes of our justification].'

Fowler (p. 214,215), 'For we have shewn, not only that reformation
of life from the practice, and purification of heart from the
liking of sin, are as plainly as can be asserted in the gospel
to be absolutely necessary to give men a right to the promises of
it, but also that its great salvation doth even consist in it.'

Mr. Fowler's Doctrine compared with William Penn the Quaker.

1. Penn's Sandy Foundation (p. 19 [p. 16 ed. 1684]), 'Life and
salvation is to them that follow Christ the light, in all his
righteousness, which every man comes only to experiment, as he
walks in a holy subjection to that measure of light and grace,
wherewith the fulness hath enlightened him.'

Fowler (p. 8), 'That is, those which are of an indispensable, and
eternal obligation, which were first written in men's hearts, and
originally dictates of human nature.'

2. Penn (p. 32 [p. 26 ed. 1684]), 'I really confess that Jesus Christ
fulfilled the Father's will, and offered up a most satisfactory
sacrifice, but not to pay God, or help him [as otherways being
unable] to save men.'

Fowler (p. 85), 'Christ was set forth to be a propitiatory sacrifice
for sin; I will not say that his Father [who is perfectly sui juris]
might be put by this means into a capacity of forgiving it.'

3. Penn (p. 16 [p. 14 ed. 1684]), 'God's remission is grounded
on man's repentance, not that it is impossible for God to pardon
without a plenary satisfaction.'

Fowler (p. 84), 'There are many that do not question but that God
could have pardoned sin, without any other satisfaction, than the
repentance of the sinner,' &c.

4. Penn (p. 27 [p. 22 ed. 1684]), 'Justification doth not go before,
but is subsequential to the mortification of lusts.'

Fowler (p. 14,15), 'This blessing of making men holy, was so much
the design of Christ's coming, that he had his very name from
it': observe the words are, 'He shall save his people from their
sins'; not from the punishment of them. And that is the primary
sense of them, which is most plainly expressed in them: 'That he
shall save his people from the punishment of sin, is a true sense
too; but it is secondary and implied only; as this latter is the
never failing and necessary consequent of the former salvation.'

5. Penn (p. 25 [p. 21 ed. 1684]), 'Since therefore there can be
no admittance had, without performing that righteous will, and
doing those holy, and perfect sayings; alas! to what value will
an imputative righteousness amount?' &c.

Fowler (p. 16), 'Christ shall bring in an inward substantial, and
everlasting righteousness, and by abrogating the outward [ceremonial]
and establishing ONLY this righteousness, he should enlarge the
Jewish Church, an accession of the Gentiles, being by that means
made unto it.'

6. Penn (p. 24,25 [p. 20 ed. 1684]), 'Since God has prescribed
an inoffensive life, as that which only can give acceptance with
him; and on the contrary hath determined never to justify the
wicked, &c.--Will not the abomination appear greatest of all, where
God shall be found condemning the just, on purpose to justify the
wicked; and that he is thereto compelled, or else no salvation,
which is the tendency of their doctrine, who imagine the righteous,
and merciful God to condemn and punish his [innocent[38]] righteous
Son, that he having satisfied for our sins, we might be justified
[while unsanctified] by the imputation of his perfect righteousness.
O why should this horrible thing be contended for by Christians!'

Fowler (p. 119), 'If it were possible [as it hath been proved it
is not] that a wicked man should have God's pardon, it would not
make him cease to be miserable.'

Fowler (p. 120), 'Were it possible that Christ's righteousness could
be imputed to an unrighteous man, I dare boldly affirm it would
signify as little to his happiness, as would a gorgeous and splendid
garment, to one that is almost starved with hunger, or that lieth
racked by the torturing diseases of the stone, or colic.'

Fowler (p. 130), 'To justify a wicked man, while he continueth
so, if it were possible for God to do it, would far more disparage
his justice, and holiness, than advance his grace and kindness.'

7. Penn (p. 26 [p. 22 ed. 1684]), 'Unless we be[come] doers of
that law, which Christ came not to destroy, but as our example to
fulfil, we can never be justified before God.'

Fowler (p. 296), 'It is impossible we should not have the design
of Christianity accomplished in us, and therefore that we should
be destitute of the power of it, if we make our Saviour's most
excellent life, the pattern of our lives. Those that sincerely,
and industriously endeavour to imitate the holy Jesus in his
spirit and actions, can never be ignorant what it is to be truly
Christians, nor can they fail to be so.'

8. Penn (p. 26), 'Nor let any fancy that Christ hath so fulfilled
it for them, as to exclude their obedience, from being requisite
to their acceptance, but only as their pattern.'

Fowler (p. 148), 'This Son of God taught men their duty, by his
own example, and did himself perform among them, what he required
of them. Now that he should tread before us EVERY step of that way,
which he hath told us leadeth to eternal happiness, and commend
those duties which are most ungrateful to our corrupt inclinations,
by his own practice; our having so brave an example is no small
encouragement, to a cheerful performance of all that is commanded.'

Understandest thou what thou readest?


FOOTNOTES:

1. Fowler's Design, p. 6.

2. Ibid.

3. Seeing, then, it is evident from scripture, how deeply and
dreadfully man is fallen from God, what a folly it is to suppose,
in such a depraved creature, conditions previous to his justification!
They who talk at this rate, know not what they say, nor whereof
they affirm. In a natural man there is no meetness, but a meetness
to sin, and a meetness to be damned. They who know themselves,
know this. And there are no pre-requisites to justification, but
what God, by his Spirit, is pleased to work in men's hearts. None
are meet to obey the gospel, till God implants in their souls
a principle of faith and evangelical obedience. Before this is
done, there is no meetness in the creature, no disposition to do
anything spiritually good; neither are any of our works, till a
change of nature takes place, acceptable and well-pleasing in the
sight of Almighty God.--Mason and Ryland.

4. Fowler, p. 6.

5. Ibid.

6. Fowler, p. 6.

7. Ibid.

8. Man, in his first estate, was holy and righteous; and he continued
to be possessed of this righteousness as long as he was obedient
to his Creator; but as soon as he disobeyed the divine command,
he lost all his holiness and righteousness at once; he emptied
himself of every spark of goodness, and was full of all manner
of wickedness; he forfeited all his primitive purity, and became
a sinful, impure, and unrighteous creature. Hence, all mankind are
destitute of original righteousness: there is none of the children
of men righteous, 'no not one: there is none that doeth good,
no not one' (Rom 3:10,12). What then becomes of the purity and
dignity of human nature, so vainly boasted of? or how shall man be
righteous before God? To this last question, we answer with Paul,
in the above-quoted chapter (vv 21, 22), 'Now the righteousness of
God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law and
the prophets; even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe.' Without this
righteousness, no soul ever was, no soul ever will be, justified
before God.--Mason and Ryland.

9. Great will be the condemnation of all those who profess to know
God, but in works deny him; who are abominable and disobedient, and
unto every good work reprobate (Titus 1:16). A great profession,
without a suitable life and conversation, will only procure a
greater condemnation. Therefore, up, ye sleepy virgins; up, and
be doing; shew your faith by your works. There is no true religion
without good works, attended with a godly walk and behaviour. There
may be works seemingly good, where there is no true religion.
Good works are not the causes, but the fruits and effects of true
religion, of justifying faith wrought in the soul by the Holy Ghost;
and where true religion is, good works, of every divine kind and
quality, will naturally follow, to the glory and praise of that grace
which alone brings salvation to miserable ruined sinners.--Mason
and Ryland.

10. Hierocles, the Greek philosopher.

11. Bunyan must have formed his opinions of the Quakers from some
persons who passed as such. No form either of doctrine or discipline
had appeared in 1672. As soon as their tenets were published, they
professed, as they do to this day, entire dependence upon Jesus
Christ for holiness.--Ed.

12. Mr. Fowler gives no reference to any of the works of these
learned divines, nor could he!! He traduces these great reformers
and the doctrines of his own church, and yet was soon after made
a bishop!!!--Ed.

13. The saints of God experience a mystery of iniquity, a horrible
depth of corruption in their own hearts, and groan under the
plague and burden of it. If we rightly know ourselves, and behold
our vileness, filthiness, and exceeding sinfulness, in their
true colours, we shall be obliged to own that we are very wicked,
unholy, ungodly, abominable; and that a principle and inclination
to evil is so prevalent in the best of us, that were God to leave
us to ourselves, we should greedily commit the most heinous sins.
These truly humbled persons, and these alone, are made sensible
of the want of the application of the precious atoning blood
of Christ to cleanse them from the pollution of sin, and of the
sanctifying grace of the Spirit to deliver them from the dominion
and tyranny of it.--Mason and Ryland.

14. 'Rusheth the soul.' To rush is a neuter verb, here used in an
active sense;--'precipitateth' gives the correct idea.--Ed.

15. 'So natural, and ignorant,' in distinction from that spiritual
wisdom which is immortal and illuminating.--Ed.

16. Against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, such as
disbelief, idolatry, adultery, &c. (p. 35).

17. How astonishing the mystery! how condescending the love! that
the infinite Deity and finite flesh should meet in one person
(Christ), in order to display to mankind the glory of God in that
divine person! to bring hell-deserving mortals into a nearness,
yea, into a oneness with his Creator, that they might be made
partakers of his holiness, and adore and admire his perfections
for ever! O Christians, know and prize your inestimable privileges,
and be instant at the throne of grace, that your souls may be
so far assimilated to the image of the ever-blessed and adorable
Jesus, that you may be constantly looking and hastening to, and
longing for that happy time, when, having dropt the dimming rages
of mortality, the veil of sinful flesh, you shall be brought to
'know him even as you are known' of him, because you shall 'see
him as he is.'--Ryland.

18. 'Common,' as the head of his church, in whom all his people
have an equal or common right.--Ed.

19. 'And even that miracle which might seem the most inconsiderable,
namely, his causing his disciple Peter to catch a fish with a small
piece of money in its mouth, was also instructive of a duty; it
being an instance of his loyalty to the supreme magistrate; for
the money was expended in paying tribute, and taken out of the sea
in that strange manner for no other purpose.'--Fowler's Design,
&c. p. 72.

20. 'Lay you,' brings forth to yourself. 'Lay' is here used as
in 'a hen lays eggs'; such an application to this proverb is a
cutting satire.--Ed.

21. 'To possess them.' Possess was formerly used as an active
verb, but now is only used as a neuter verb; the meaning is 'to
fill them with the certainty of the knowledge.'

22. 'As in Adam all died,' were bereft of every good, and became
obnoxious to wrath and endless misery, so 'IN Christ,' by virtue
of his life, death, and resurrection, 'shall all be made alive';
they shall have that incorruptible seed implanted in their hearts,
which liveth and abideth for ever. Every grace and blessing
is derived to the renewed soul from its union to Christ, as its
living head, through the eternal Spirit. Christ hath fulfilled
all righteousness for us and in our stead, and this was the end
and intent of his coming into the world; so that Christ is now
become the righteousness of all them that do truly believe in him.
'Created IN Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before
ordained that we should walk in them' (Eph 2:10).--Mason and
Ryland.

23. Would to God this legal, self-exalting, Christ-dishonouring
doctrine had been confined to the times in which our author wrote, or
had been then banished to hell, from whence it came; but alas! it
is but too prevalent in these degenerate times, in which Arianism,
Arminianism, Socinianism, &c., &c., so dreadfully infect the
multitude even of professors! In the national churches, what do
we hear but Moses and the law, 'This do and live'; or, in other
words, do your duty as well as you can, and Christ will do the
rest: thus making the gospel the sacrifice of Christ, and the work
of the Spirit, of no effect. Whereas, on the contrary, unregenerate,
depraved, and sinful mortals 'have no power to do good works
pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God preventing
[or going before] them, that they may have a good will; and
working in and by them, when they have that good will'; which is
perfectly agreeable to our Lord's declaration, (John 15:5) 'Without
me, ye can do nothing.'--Mason and Ryland.

24. 'Sir Johns,' formerly the title given to the priests. It was
succeeded by the title 'reverend.'--Ed.

25. Chap. 17: 'How fearfully the gospel is abused by the papists.'
Chap. 18: 'Those sottish, who expect salvation without holiness;
and those more so who encourage themselves by the grace of the
gospel in unholiness.'--Heads of these Chapters.--Ed.

26. 'Would that man be accounted any better than a perfect idiot,
who, being sorely hurt, should expect from his surgeon perfect
ease, when he will not permit him to apply any plaister for the
healing of his wound? Or that being deadly sick, should look that
his physician should deliver him from his pain, when he will not
take any course he prescribes for the removal of the distemper
that is the cause of it?'--Fowler's Design, p. 216. How admirably
does Bunyan detect and unravel this casuistic sophistry.--Ed.

27. 'The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith';
that is, from one degree of faith to another: therefore increase
in faith; live nearer to Christ; and the nearer you live to
the Saviour, the farther you will be from sin; yea, he will make
you, by precious faith in him, more than conqueror over all your
spiritual enemies: therefore venture wholly upon Christ, and see
if he will cast you out: indeed, he never will. Trust in him,
hope in him, believe in him, and you will never be disappointed.
All our fitness is in Christ. Believe in him, and he is yours. In
him dwells all fullness. Believe in Christ, and all that Christ
has is yours: his blood is yours, his wisdom is yours, his
righteousness, his sanctification is yours; yea, Christ Jesus
himself is yours--he is yours in this world, and in the world to
come; he is yours in time, and in eternity. Even so, Amen.--Mason
and Ryland.

28. 'More groundedly,' with better foundation.

29. 'Take the way,' occupy the place.--Ed.

30. 'Doubtful opinions, modes and rites, eagerly opposed, is like
the apes blowing at a glowworm, which affords neither light nor
warmth' (p. 239).

31. These sentiments are the essential fundamentals of all state
religions, be they heathen, christian, or mohamedan. This plain
avowal of them might have been the cause why the author was soon
after made a bishop of the Church of England.--Ed.

32. Like the vicar of Bray, near Maidenhead, who boasted of his
consistency. He was under Henry VIII a papist, then a semi-protestant;
under Edward, a protestant; under Mary, again a papist; and under
Elizabeth, a protestant. Still he had never ceased to be vicar of
Bray.--Ed.

33. 'Diggle together,' probably from 'degladiation,' a combat,
quarrel, or contest; a fencing match between two friends.--Ed.

34. Fowler's picture of the want of uniformity in the preachers
of his sect, all being under the 'Act of Uniformity,' is very
amusing and instructive!!--Ed.

35. Undoubtedly so; because the good works of a man who is under
the influence and power of divine grace, flow from the constraining
love of a coveannt-reconciled God in Christ Jesus, whom the
holy-making Spirit glorifies and renders precious to every true
believer in him.--Mason and Ryland.

36. The Jews were divided into three sections: I. The descendants
of Israel; II. Proselytes who conformed to all the Mosaic rites;
and, III. Those who were bound to obey the seven precepts of
Noah--and these, although they did not conform to the Jewish rites,
yet were admitted to the worship of the true God and the hope of
the life to come. According to the Talmud these precepts were--1.
To renounce idols and all idolatrous worship. 2. To worship the
true God, the creator of heaven and earth. 3. Bloodshed, to commit
no murder. 4. Not to be defiled with fornication. 5. Rapine, against
theft and robbery. 6. To administer justice. 7. Not eating flesh
with the blood in it.--Ed.

37. 'To prevent,' from 'praevenio,' to go before; 'preventing us'
was formerly used for 'preparing us.' It is now obsolete in this
sense, but frequently occurs in the Bible.--Ed.

38. 'Innocent' instead of 'righteous,' ed. 1684.

***

REPROBATION ASSERTED: OR, THE DOCTRINE OF ETERNAL ELECTION AND
REPROBATION PROMISCUOUSLY HANDLED, IN ELEVEN CHAPTERS.

WHEREIN THE MOST MATERIAL OBJECTIONS MADE BY THE OPPOSERS OF THIS
DOCTRINE, ARE FULLY ANSWERED; SEVERAL DOUBTS REMOVED, AND SUNDRY
CASES OF CONSCIENCE RESOLVED.

BY JOHN BUNYAN OF BEDFORD, A LOVER OF PEACE AND TRUTH.

'What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but
the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded.'--Romans
11:7

London: Printed for G. L., and are to be sold in Turn-stile-alley,
in Holbourn. Small 4to, 44 pages.


EDITOR'S ADVERTISEMENT.

This valuable tract was first published without a date, but according
to Doe's List, about the year 1674, and has never been reprinted
in a separate volume; it appeared in only one edition of the
collected works of John Bunyan--that with the notes by Ryland and
Mason; and in his select works, published in America in 1832. No
man could have been better qualified to write upon the subject
of reprobation than Bunyan.--His extraordinary knowledge of, and
fervent attachment to, the holy oracles, peculiarly fitted him
with unwavering verity to display this doctrine of divine truth.
He was incapable of any misrepresentation with a view of concealing
what fallen reason might deem a deformity, or to render the doctrines
of the cross palatable to mankind. His object is to display the
truth, and then humbly to submit to the wisdom of God, and zealously
to vindicate it. There is no subject which more fully displays
our fallen nature, than that of reprobation. All mankind agree
in opinion, that there ever has been an elect, or good class
of society; and a reprobate, or worthless and bad class; varying
in turpitude or in goodness to a great extent and in almost
imperceptible degrees. All must unite in ascribing to God that
divine foreknowledge that renders ten thousand years but as one
day, or hour, or moment in his sight. All ascribe to his omnipotence
the power to ordain or decree what shall come to pass--and where
is the spirit that can demonstrate a shade of difference between
such foreknowledge and preordination. All agree that in the
lower class of animals some of the same species pass their lives
in luxury and comfort, while others are cruelly tormented, this
world comprising their whole term of existence; and will those
who refuse to submit to the sovereignty of God in the doctrine of
election dare to arraign his conduct in leaving some out of his
electing love? The reprobate or worthless lose nothing by the
happiness of others. It is inscrutably hid from mankind who are
the elect, until the Holy Spirit influences them with the love
of God in Christ Jesus, and this sometimes in the last moments of
life. There is every encouragement, nay incentive, to the sinner
who feels the burthen of guilt to fly for refuge to the hope set
before him in the gospel. 'It is a faithful saying, and worthy
of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
SINNERS'; even the chief of sinners. The glad tidings are addressed
to ALL sin-sick souls; and Bunyan's statement of this truth is clear,
scriptural, and reasonable. Very different is the account of the
reprobation given by R. Resburie in his Stop to the Gangrene of
Arminianism, 1651. 'For the reprobate God decrees the permitting
of sin in order to hardening, and their hardening in it, in order
to their condemnation.' p. 69. 'As election is the book of life,
so reprobation of death; the names of the reprobate are there
registered for destruction.' p. 73. It is much to be regretted
that sentiments like these have been too commonly uttered. It is
as an antidote to such ideas that this little work was written; but,
unfortunately, it has never been widely circulated and read. May
the divine blessing follow this attempt to spread these important,
although to many, unpalatable, doctrines.

GEORGE OFFOR.


REPROBATION ASSERTED.


CHAPTER 1.

That there is a Reprobation.

In my discourse upon this subject, I shall study as much brevity
as clearness and edification will allow me; not adding words to
make the volume swell, but contracting myself within the bounds of
few lines, for the profit and commodity of those that shall take
the pains to read my labours. And though I might abundantly multiply
arguments for the evincing and vindicating this conclusion, yet I
shall content myself with some few scripture demonstrations: the
first of which I shall gather out of the ninth of the Romans,
from that discourse of the apostle's, touching the children of
the flesh, and the children of the promise.

1. At the beginning of this chapter, we find the apostle grievously
lamenting and bemoaning of the Jews, at the consideration of their
miserable state: 'I say the truth in Christ, [saith he] I lie not,
my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, that I
have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I could
wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my
kinsmen according to the flesh': Poor hearts, saith he, they will
perish; they are a miserable sad and helpless people; their eyes
are darkened that they may not see, and their back is bowed down
alway (Rom 11:10). Wherefore? Have they not the means of grace?
Yes verily, and that in goodly measure. First they 'are Israelites;
to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants,
and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises;
whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.' What then
should be the reason? Why saith he, though they be the children
of Abraham according to the flesh, yet they are the children of
Abraham BUT according to the flesh: 'For they are not all Israel
[in the best sense] which are of Israel: neither, because they are
the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but, in Isaac shall
thy seed be called.' That is, they that are the children of the
flesh, they are not the children of God; but the children of the
promise shall be counted for the seed. So then, here you see that
they that are only the children of the flesh, as the greatest
part of Israel were, they are those that are neither counted for
the seed, the children of promise, nor the children of God; but
are rejected, and of the reprobation. This therefore shall at this
time serve for the first scripture-demonstration.

2. Another scripture you have in the eleventh chapter of this
epistle, from these words, 'The election hath obtained it, and the
REST were blinded' (Rom 11:7). These words are shedding[1] words,
they sever between men and men; the election, the rest; the chosen,
the left; the embraced, the refused: 'The election have obtained
it, and the rest were blinded.' By rest here, must needs be
understood those not elect, because set one in opposition to the
other; and if not elect, what then but reprobate?

3. A third scripture is that in the Acts of the Apostles, 'And as
many as were ordained to eternal life, believed' (13:48). 'And as
many'; by these words, as by the former, you may see how the Holy
Ghost distinguisheth or divideth between men and men; the sons,
and the sons of Adam. 'As many as were ordained to eternal life,
believed': If by many here, we are to understand every individual,
then not only the whole world must at least believe the gospel,
of which we see the most fall short, but they must be ordained to
eternal life; which other scriptures contradict: for there is the
rest, besides the elect; the stubble and chaff, as well as wheat:
many therefore must here include but some; 'For though--Israel be
as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved' (Rom 9:27; Isa
1:9, 10:22,23).

I might here multiply many other texts, but in the mouth of two
or three witnesses shall every word be established. Let these
therefore for this, suffice to prove that there is a reprobation.
For this I say, though the children of the flesh, the rest besides
the election, and the like, were not mentioned in the word; yet
seeing there is such a thing as the children of the promise, the
seed, the children of God, and the like, and that too under several
other phrases, as predestinated, foreknown, chosen in Christ, and
written in the Book of life, and appointed unto life, with many
others: I say seeing these things are thus apparent, it is without
doubt, that there is such a thing as a reprobation also (Rom 8;
Eph 1:3,4; 1 Thess 5:9).

Nay, further, From the very word election, it followeth unavoidably;
for whether you take it as relating to this, of distinguishing
between persons as touching the world to come, or with reference
to God's acts of choosing this or that man to this or that office,
work, or employment in this world, it still signifieth such a
choosing, as that but some are therein concerned, and that therefore
some are thence excluded. Are all the elect, the seed, the saved,
the vessels of mercy, the chosen and peculiar? Are not some,
yea the most, the children of the flesh, the rest, the lost, the
vessels of wrath, of dishonour, and the children of perdition?
(Rom 11:9; 1 Peter 2:8,9; Matt 10:16; 2 Sam 6:21; Psa 78:67,68;
John 15:16; 2 Cor 4:3; Rom 9:21,22; John 17:12).


CHAPTER 2

What Reprobation is.

Having thus shewed you that there is such a thing as a reprobation,
I come now to shew you what it is. Which that I may do to your
edification, I shall First shew you what this word reprobation
signifieth in the general, as it concerneth persons temporary and
visibly reprobate: Second, more particularly, as it concerneth
persons that are eternally and invisibly reprobate.

First, Generally, As it concerneth persons temporarily and visibly
reprobate, thus: To be reprobate is to be disapproved, void of
judgment, and rejected, &c. To be disapproved, that is, when the
word condemns them, either as touching the faith or the holiness
of the gospel; the which they must needs be, that are void of
spiritual and heavenly judgment in the mysteries of the kingdom;
a manifest token [that] they are rejected. And hence it is that
they are said to be reprobate or void of judgment concerning the
faith; reprobate or void of judgment touching every good work;
having a reprobate mind, to do those things that are not convenient,
either as to faith or manners. And hence it is again, that they
are also said to be rejected of God, cast away, and the like (2
Cor 13:6,7; 2 Tim 3:8; Titus 1:16; Rom 1:28; Jer 6:30; 1 Cor 9:27).

I call this temporary visible reprobation, because these appear,
and are detected by the word as such that are found under the
above-named errors, and so adjudged without the grace of God.
Yet it is possible for some of these, however for the present
disapproved, through the blessed acts and dispensations of grace,
not only to become visible saints, but also saved for ever. Who
doubts but that he who now by examining himself, concerning faith,
doth find himself, though under profession, graceless, may after
that, he seeing his woeful state, not only cry to God for mercy,
but find grace, and obtain mercy to help in time of need? though
it is true, that for the most part the contrary is fulfilled on
them.

Second, But to pass this, and more particularly to touch the
eternal invisible reprobation, which I shall thus hold forth: It
is to be passed by in, or left out of, God's election; yet so, as
considered upright. In which position you have these four things
considerable: 1. The act of God's election. 2. The negative of
that act. 3. The persons reached by that negative. And, 4. Their
qualification when thus reached by it.

1. For the first. This act of God in electing, it is a choosing
or fore-appointing of some infallibly unto eternal life, which he
also hath determined shall be brought to pass by the means that
should be made manifest and efficacious to that very end (Eph
1:3-5; 1 Peter 1:2).

2. Now the negative of this act is, a passing by, or a leaving
of those not concerned in this act; a leaving of them, I say,
without the bounds, and so the saving privileges of this act; as
it followeth by natural consequence, that because a man chooseth
but some, therefore he chooseth not all, but leaveth, as the
negative of that act, all others whatsoever. Wherefore, as I said
before, those not contained within this blessed act, are called
the rest besides the election. 'The election hath obtained it,
and the rest were blinded.'

3. The persons then that are contained under the negative of this
act, they are those, and those only, that pass through this wicked
world without the saving grace of God's elect; those, I say, that
miss the most holy faith, which they in time are blest withal,
who are fore-appointed unto glory.

4. And now for the qualification they were considered under, when
this act of reprobation laid hold upon them; to wit, They were
considered upright.

This is evident, From this consideration, that reprobation is God's
act, even the negative of his choosing or electing, and none of
the acts of God make any man a sinner. It is further evident by
the similitude that is taken from the carriage of the potter in
his making of his pots; for by this comparison the God of heaven
is pleased to shew unto us the nature of his determining in the
act of reprobation. 'Hath not the potter power over the clay, of
the same lump?' &c. (Rom 9:21). Consider a little, and you shall
see that these three things do necessarily fall in, to complete
the potter's action in every pot he makes.

(1.) A determination in his own mind what pot to make of this
or that piece of clay; a determination, I say, precedent to the
fashion of the pot; the which is true in the highest degree, in
him that is excellent in working; he determines the end, before
the beginning is perfected (Isa 41:22, 46:10). 'For this cause
[very purpose] have I raised thee up' (Exo 9:16).

(2.) The next thing considerable in the potter; it is the so
making of the pot, even as he determined; a vessel to honour, or
a vessel to dishonour. There is no confusion nor disappointment
under the hand of this eternal God, his work is perfect, and every
way doth answer to what he hath determined (Deut 32:4).

(3.) Observe again, That whether the vessel be to honour or to
dishonour, yet the potter makes it good, sound, and fit for service;
his fore-determining to make this a vessel to dishonour, hath no
persuasion at all with him to break or mar the pot: Which very
thing doth well resemble the state of man as under the act of
eternal reprobation, for 'God made man upright' (Eccl 7:29).

From these conclusions then,

Consider, 1. That the simple act of reprobation, it is a leaving
or passing by, not a cursing of the creature.

Consider, 2. Neither doth this act alienate the heart of God from
the reprobate, nor tie him up from loving, favouring, or blessing
of him; no, not from blessing of him with the gift of Christ, of
faith, of hope, and many other benefits. It only denieth them that
benefit, that will infallibly bring them to eternal life, and that
in despite of all opposition; it only denieth so to bless them as
the elect themselves are blessed. Abraham loved all the children
he had by all his wives, and gave them portions also; but his
choice blessing, as the fruit of his chiefest love, he reserved
for chosen Isaac (Gen 25:5,6).

Consider Lastly, The act of reprobation doth harm to no man,
neither means him any; nay, it rather decrees him upright, lets
him be made upright, and so be turned into the world.[2]


CHAPTER 3.

Of the Antiquity of Reprobation.

Having now proceeded so far as to shew you what reprobation
is, it will not be amiss if in this place I briefly shew you its
antiquity, even when it began its rise; the which you may gather
by these following particulars.

First, Reprobation is before the person cometh into the world,
or hath done good or evil: This is evident by that of Paul to the
Romans: 'For the children being not yet born, neither having done
any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election
might stand not of works, but of him that calleth; it was said unto
Rebecca, The elder shall serve the younger' (9:11). Here you find
twain in their mother's womb, and both receiving their destiny,
not only before they had done good or evil, but before they were
in a capacity to do it, they being yet unborn; their destiny,
I say, the one unto, the other not unto, the blessing of eternal
life; the one chose, the other refused; the one elect, the other
reprobate. The same also might be said of Ishmael and his brother
Isaac, both which did also receive their destiny before they came
into the world: for the promise that this Isaac should be the
heir, it was also before Ishmael was born, though he was elder by
fourteen years, or more, than his brother (Gen 15:4,5, 16:4,5,16,
17:25, 21:5). And it is yet further evident,

1. Because election is an act of grace; 'There is a remnant according
to the election of grace' (Rom 11:5). Which act of grace saw no
way so fit to discover its purity and independency, as by fastening
on the object before it came into the world; that being the state
in which at least no good were done, either to procure good from
God, or to eclipse and darken this precious act of grace. For
though it is true that no good thing that we have done before
conversion, can obtain the grace of election; yet the grace of
election then appeareth most, when it prevents[3] our doing good,
that we might be loved therefore: wherefore he saith again, 'That
the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calleth; it was said unto her, The elder
shall serve the younger' (Rom 9:11,12).

2. This is most agreeable to the nature of the promise of giving
seed to Abraham; which promise, as it was made before the child
was conceived, so it was fulfilled at the best time, for the
discovery of the act of grace, that could have been pitched upon:
At this time will I come (saith God) 'and Sarah shall have a son'
(Gen 18:14); which promise, because it carried in its bowels the
very grace of electing love, therefore it left out Ishmael, with
the children of Keturah: 'For in Isaac shall thy seed be called'
(Rom 4:16-19, 9:7).

3. This was the best and fittest way for the decrees to receive
sound bottom, even for God both to choose and refuse, before the
creature had done good or evil, and so before they came into the
world: 'That the purpose of God according to election might stand,'
saith he, therefore before the children were yet born, or had done
any good or evil, it was said unto her, &c. God's decree would for
ever want foundation, should it depend at all upon the goodness
and holiness either of men or angels; especially if it were to
stand upon that good that is wrought before conversion, yea, or
after conversion either. We find, by daily experience, how hard
and difficult it is, for even the holiest in the world, to bear
up and maintain their faith and love to God; yea, so hard, as not
at all to do it without continual supplies from heaven. How then
is it possible for any so to carry it before God, as to lay, by
this his holiness, a foundation for election, as to maintain that
foundation, and thereby to procure all those graces that infallibly
saveth the sinner? But now the choice, I say, being a choice of
grace, as is manifest, it being acted before the creature's birth;
here grace hath laid the cornerstone, and determined the means to
bring the work to perfection. Thus 'the foundation of God standeth
sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his' (2 Tim
2:19). That is, who he hath chosen, having excluded works, both
good and bad, and founded all in an unchangeable act of grace;
the negative whereof, is this harmless reprobation.

Second, But secondly, To step a little backward, and so to make
all sure: This act of reprobation was before the world began;
which therefore must needs confirm that which was said but now,
that they were, before they were born, both destinated before
they had done good or evil. This is manifest by that of Paul to
the Ephesians, at the beginning of his epistle; where, speaking
of Election, whose negative is reprobation, he saith, 'God hath
chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world.' Nay
further, if you please, consider, that as Christ was ordained
to suffer before the foundation of the world, and as we that are
elected were chosen in him before the foundation of the world;
so it was also ordained we should know him, before the foundation
of the world; ordained that we should be holy before him in love,
before the foundation of the world; and that we in time should be
created in him to good works, and ordained before that we should
walk in them. Wherefore reprobation also, it being the negative of
electing love; that is, because God elected but some, therefore
he left the rest: these rest therefore must needs be of as ancient
standing under reprobation, as the chosen are under election;
both which, it is also evident, was before the world began. Which
serveth yet further to prove that reprobation could not be with
respect to this or the other sin, it being only a leaving them,
and that before the world, out of that free choice which he was
pleased to bless the other with. Even as the clay with which the
dishonourable vessel is made, did not provoke the potter, for the
sake of this or that impediment, therefore to make it so; but the
potter of his own will, of the clay of the same lump, of the clay
that is full as good as that of which he hath made the vessel to
honour, did make this and the other a vessel of dishonour, &c. (1
Peter 1:20,21; 1 Cor 2:7; Eph 1:3,4, 2:10).[4]


CHAPTER 4.

Of the causes of Reprobation.

Having thus in a word or two shewed the antiquity of Reprobation,
I now come in this place to shew you the cause thereof; for
doubtless this must stand a truth, That whatever God doth, there
is sufficient ground therefore, whether by us apprehended, or else
without our reach.

First then, It is caused from the very nature of God. There are two
things in God, from which, or by the virtue of which, all things
have their rise, to wit, the eternity of God in general, and the
eternal perfection of every one of his attributes in particular:
for as by the first, he must needs be before all things; so by
virtue of the second, must all things consist. And as he is before
all things, they having consistence by him; so also is he before
all states, or their causes, be they either good or bad, of
continuance or otherwise, he being the first without beginning,
&c., whereas all other things, with their causes, have rise,
dependance, or toleration of being from him (Col 1:17).

Hence it follows, that nothing, either person or cause, &c., can
by any means have a being, but first he knows thereof, allows
thereof, and decrees it shall be so. 'Who is he that saith, and
it cometh to pass, when the Lord commandeth it not?' (Lam 3:37).
Now then, because that reprobation, as well as election, are
subordinate to God; his will also, which is eternally perfect,
being most immediately herein concerned; it was impossible that
any should be reprobate, before God had both willed and decreed
it should be so. It is not the being of a thing that administers
matter of knowledge or foresight thereof to God, but the perfection
of his knowledge, wisdom, and power, &c., that giveth the thing
its being: God did not fore-decree there should be a world, because
he foresaw there would be one; but there must be one, because he had
before decreed there should be one. The same is true as touching
the case in hand: 'For this cause [very purpose] have I raised
thee up, for to shew in thee my power' (Exo 9:16; Rom 9:17).

Second, A second cause of eternal reprobation, is the exercise
of God's sovereignty; for if this is true, that there is nothing
either visible or invisible, whether in heaven or earth, but hath
its being from him: then it must most reasonably follow, that he
is therefore sovereign Lord, &c., and may also according to his
own will, as he pleaseth himself, both exercise and manifest the
same; being every whit absolute; and can do and may do whatsoever
his soul desireth: and indeed, good reason, for he hath not only
made them all, but 'for his pleasure they both were and are created'
(Rev 4:11).

Now the very exercise of this sovereignty produceth reprobation:
'Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardeneth' (Rom 9:18). 'Hath not the potter power over the
clay, of the same lump?' And doth he not make his pots according
to his pleasure? Here therefore the mercy, justice, wisdom and
power of God, take liberty to do what they will; saying, 'My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure' (Isa 46:10;
Job 23:13; Dan 4:35; Isa 43:13).

Third, Another cause of eternal reprobation, is the act and working
of distinguishing love, and everlasting grace. God hath universal
love, and particular love; general love, and distinguishing love;
and so accordingly doth decree, purpose, and determine: from
general love, the extension of general grace and mercy: but from
that love that is distinguishing, peculiar grace and mercy: 'Was
not Esau Jacob's brother?' saith the Lord, 'yet I loved Jacob'
(Mal 1:2). Yet I loved Jacob, that is, with a better love, or
a love that is more distinguishing. As he further makes appear
in his answer to our father Abraham, when he prayed to God for
Ishmael: 'As for Ishmael, [saith he] I have heard thee: Behold,
I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful. But my covenant
will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee' (Gen
17:20,21). Touching which words, there are these things observable.

1. That God had better love for Isaac, than he had for his brother
Ishmael. Yet,

2. Not because Isaac had done more worthy and goodly deeds, for
Isaac was yet unborn.

3. This choice blessing could not be denied to Ishmael, because
he had disinherited himself by sin; for this blessing was entailed
to Isaac, before Ishmael had a being also (Rom 4:16-19; Gen 15:4,5,
chapter 16).

4. These things therefore must needs fall out through the working
of distinguishing love and mercy, which had so cast the business,
'that the purpose of God according to election might stand.'

Further, Should not God decree to shew distinguishing love and
mercy, as well as that which is general and common, he must not
discover his best love at all to the sons of men. Again, if he
should reveal and extend his best love to all the world in general,
then there would not be such a thing as love that doth distinguish;
for distinguishing love appeareth in separating between Isaac
and Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, the many called, and the few chosen.
Thus by virtue of distinguishing love, some must be reprobate:
for distinguishing love must leave some, both of the angels in
heaven, and the inhabitants of the earth; wherefore the decree
also that doth establish it, must needs leave some.

Fourth, Another cause of reprobation, Is God's willingness to
shew his wrath, and to make his power known. This is one of those
arguments that the holy apostle setteth against the most knotty
and strong objection that ever was framed against the doctrine of
eternal reprobation: 'Thou wilt say then unto me, [saith he] Why
doth he yet find fault?' For if it be his will that some should
be rejected, hardened, and perish, why then is he offended that
any sin against him; 'for who hath resisted his will?' Hold, saith
the apostle; stay a little here; first remember this, Is it meet
to say unto God, What doest thou? 'Shall the thing formed say
to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the
potter power over the clay, of the same lump,' &c. Besides, when
you have thought your worst, to wit, that the effects of reprobation
must needs be consummate in the eternal perdition of the creature;
yet again consider, 'What if God, willing to shew his wrath,' as
well as grace and mercy? And what if he, that he may so do, exclude
some from having share in that grace that would infallibly, against
all resistance, bring us safe unto eternal life? What then? Is he
therefore the author of your perishing, or his eternal reprobation
either? Do you not know that he may refuse to elect who he will,
without abusing of them? Also that he may deny to give them that
grace that would preserve them from sin, without being guilty of
their damnation? May he not, to shew his wrath, suffer 'with much
long-suffering' all that are 'the vessels of wrath,' by their own
voluntary will, to fit themselves for wrath and for destruction?
(Rom 9:19-22). Yea, might he not even in the act of reprobation,
conclude also to suffer them thus left, to fall from the state he
left them in, that is, as they were considered upright; and when
fallen, to bind them fast in chains of darkness unto the judgment
of the great day, but he must needs be charged foolishly? You
shall see in that day what a harmony and what a glory there will
be found in all God's judgments in the overthrow of the sinner;
also how clear the Lord will shew himself of having any working
hand in that which causeth eternal ruin; notwithstanding he hath
reprobated such, doth suffer them to sin, and that too, that he
might shew his wrath on the vessels of his wrath; the which I
also, after this next chapter, shall further clear up to you. As
'the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations,'
without approving of their miscarriages; so he also knoweth how
'to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished'
(2 Peter 2:9): yet never to deserve the least of blame for his
so reserving of them; though none herein can see his way, for he
alone knows how to do it.[5]


CHAPTER 5.

Of the Unchangeableness of Eternal Reprobation.

Many opinions have passed through the hearts of the sons of
men concerning reprobation; most of them endeavouring so to hold
it forth, as therewith they might, if not heal their conscience
slightly, yet maintain their own opinion, in their judgment,
of other things; still wringing, now the word this way, and anon
again that, for their purpose; also framing within their soul such
an imagination of God and his acts in eternity, as would suit with
such opinions, and so present all to the world. And the rather they
have with greatest labour strained unweariedly at this above many
other truths, because of the grim and dreadful face it carrieth in
most men's apprehensions. But none of these things, however they
may please the creature, can by any means in any measure, either
cause God to undo, unsay, or undetermine what he hath concerning
this, decreed and established.

First, Because they suit not with his nature, especially in
these foundation-acts: 'The foundation of God standeth sure' (2
Tim 2:19), even touching reprobation, 'that the purpose of God
according to election might stand' (Rom 9:11). 'I know [saith
Solomon] that whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it,' &c. (Eccl 3:14).
'Hath he said, and shall he not do it? Hath he spoken, and shall
not make it good?' (Num 23:19). His decrees are composed according
to his eternal wisdom, established upon his unchangeable will,
governed by his knowledge, prudence, power, justice, and mercy,
and are brought to conclusion, on his part, in perfect holiness,
through the abiding of his most blessed truth and faithfulness: 'He
is the rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment:
a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he' (Deut
32:4).

Second, This decree is made sure by the number, measure, and bounds
of election; for election and reprobation do inclose all reasonable
creatures; that is, either the one or the other; election, those
that are set apart for glory; and reprobation, those left out of
this choice.

Now as touching the elect, they are by this decree confined to
that limited number of persons that must amount to the complete
making up the fulness of the mystical body of Christ; yea so
confined by this eternal purpose, that nothing can be diminished
from or added thereunto: and hence it is that they are called his
body and members in particular, 'the fulness of him that filleth
all in all' (Eph 1:23) and 'the measure of the stature of the
fulness of Christ' (Eph 4:13). Which body, considering him as the
head thereof, in conclusion maketh up one perfect man, and holy
temple for the Lord. These are called Christ's substance, inheritance
and lot (Psa 16); and are said to be booked, marked, and sealed
with God's most excellent knowledge, approbation and liking (2
Tim 2:19). As Christ said to his Father, 'Thine eyes did see my
substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy book all my members
were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet
there was none of them' (Psa 139:16). This being thus, I say, it
is in the first place impossible that any of those members should
miscarry, for 'Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's
elect?' (Rom 8:33) and because they are as to number every way
sufficient, being his body, and so by their completing to be made
a perfect man: therefore all others are rejected, that the 'purpose
of God according to election might stand' (Rom 9:11). Besides,
it would not only argue weakness in the decree, but monstrousness
in the body, if after this, any appointed should miscarry, or any
besides them be added to them (Matt 24:24).

Thirdly, Nay further, that all may see how punctual, exact, and
to a tittle this decree of election is, God hath not only as to
number and quantity confined the persons, but also determined and
measured, and that before the world, the number of the gifts and
graces that are to be bestowed on these members in general; and
also what graces and gifts to be bestowed on this or that member
in particular: He 'hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings--in
Christ, according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation
of the word' (Eph 1:3,4). And bestoweth them in time upon us,
'According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ
Jesus our Lord' (Eph 3:11). He hath given to the eye, the grace
that belongeth to the eye; and to the hand that which he also hath
appointed for it. And so to every other member of the body elect,
he doth deal out to them their determined measure of grace and
gifts most fit for their place and office. Thus is the decree
established, both of the saved, and also the non-elect (Rom 12:3;
Eph 4:16; Col 2:19; Eph 4:12,13).

Fourth, But again, another thing that doth establish this decree
of eternal reprobation, is the weakness that sin, in the fall,
and since, hath brought all reprobates into: For though it be most
true, that sin is no cause of eternal reprobation; yet seeing sin
hath seized on the reprobate, it cannot be but thereby the decree
must needs be the faster fixed. If the king, for this or the other
weighty reason, doth decree not to give this or that man, who yet
did never offend him, a place in his privy chamber; if this man
after this shall be infected with the plague, this rather fastens
than loosens the king's decree. As the angels that were left out
of God's election, by reason of the sin they committed after, are
so far off from being by that received into God's decree, that
they are therefore bound for it in chains of everlasting darkness
to the judgment of the great day.


CHAPTER 6.

Whether to be reprobated be the same with being appointed before-hand
unto eternal condemnation? If not, how do they differ? Also whether
reprobation be the cause of condemnation?

It hath been the custom of ignorant men much to quarrel at eternal
reprobation, concluding, for want of knowledge in the mystery of
God's will, that if he reprobate any from eternity, he had as good
have said, I will make this man to damn him; I will decree this
man, without any consideration, to the everlasting pains of hell.
When in very deed, for God to reprobate, and to appoint before-hand to
eternal condemnation, are two distinct things, properly relating
to two distinct attributes, arising from two distinct causes.

First, They are two distinct things: Reprobation, a simple leaving
of the creature out of the bounds of God's election; but to appoint
to condemnation is to bind them over to everlasting punishment.
Now there is a great difference between my refusing to make of
such a tree a pillar in my house, and of condemning it unto the
fire to be burned.

Second, As to the attributes; reprobation respects God's sovereignty;
but to appoint to condemnation, his justice (Rom 9:18; Gen 18:25).

Third, As to the causes; sovereignty being according to the will
of God, but justice according to the sin of man. For God, though
he be the only sovereign Lord, and that to the height of perfection;
yet he appointeth no man to the pains of everlasting fire, merely
from sovereignty, but by the rule of justice: God damneth not the
man because he is a man, but a sinner; and fore-appoints him to
that place and state, by fore-seeing of him wicked (Rom 1:18,19;
Col 3:6).

Again, As reprobation is not the same with fore-appointing to
eternal condemnation; so neither is it the cause thereof.

If it be the cause, then it must either, 1. Leave him infirm.
Or, 2. Infuse sin into him. Or, 3. Take from him something that
otherwise would keep him upright. 4. Or both license Satan to
tempt, and the reprobate to close in with the temptation. But it
doth none of these; therefore it is not the cause of the condemnation
of the creature.

That it is not the cause of sin, it is evident,

1. Because the elect are as much involved therein, as those that
are passed by.

2. It leaveth him not infirm; for he is by an after-act, to wit,
of creation, formed perfectly upright.

3. That reprobation infuseth no sin, appeareth, because it is the
act of God.

4. That it taketh nothing, that good is, from him, is also manifest,
it being only a leaving of him.

5. And that it is not by this act that Satan is permitted to tempt,
or the reprobate to sin, is manifest; because as Christ was tempted,
so the elect fall as much into the temptation, at least many of
them, as many of those that are reprobate: whereas if these things
came by reprobation, then the reprobate would be only concerned
therein. All which will be further handled in these questions yet
behind.

Object. From what hath been said, there is concluded this at least,
That God hath infallibly determined, and that before the world,
the infallible damnation of some of his creatures: for if God hath
before the world [was made] bound some over to eternal punishment,
and that as you say, for sin; then this determination must either
be fallible or infallible; not fallible, for then your other position
of the certainty of the number of God's elect, is shaken; unless
you hold that there may be a number that shall neither go to heaven
nor hell. Well then, if God hath indeed determined, fore-determined,
that some must infallibly perish; doth not this his determination
lay a necessity on the reprobate to sin, that he may be damned;
for, no sin, no damnation; that is your own argument.

Ans. That God hath ordained (Jude 4), the damnation of some of
his creatures, it is evident; but whether this his determination
be positive and absolute, there is the question: for the better
understanding whereof, I shall open unto you the variety of God's
determinations, and their nature, as also rise.

The determinations of God touching the destruction of the creature,
they are either ordinary or extraordinary: those I count ordinary
that were commonly pronounced by the prophets and apostles, &c.,
in their ordinary way of preaching; to the end men might be affected
with the love of their own salvation: now these either bound or
loosed, but as the condition or qualification was answered by the
creature under sentence, and no otherwise (1 Sam 12:25; Isa 1:20;
Matt 18:3; Luke 13:1-3; Rom 2:8,9, 8:13, 11:23; 1 Cor 6:9-11).

Again, These extraordinary, though they respect the same conditions,
yet they are not grounded immediately upon them, but upon the
infallible fore-knowledge and fore-sight of God, and are thus
distinguished. First the ordinary determination, it stands but
at best upon a supposition that the creature may continue in sin,
and admits of a possibility that it may not; but the extraordinary
stands upon an infallible fore-sight that the creature will continue
in sin; wherefore this must needs be positive, and as infallible
as God himself.

Again, These two determinations are also distinguished thus: the
ordinary is applicable to the elect as well as to the reprobate,
but the other to the reprobate only. It is proper to say even to
the elect themselves, 'He that believeth shall be saved, and he
that believeth not shall be damned'; but not to say to them, These
are appointed to UTTER destruction, or that they shall utterly
perish in their own corruptions; or that for them is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever (1 Kings 20:42; 2 Peter 2:12; Jude
13).

So then, though God by these determinations doth not lay some
under irrecoverable condemnation, yet by one of them he doth; as
is further made out thus:

1. God most perfectly foreseeth the final impenitency of those that
so die, from the beginning to the end of the world (Prov 15:11;
Psa 139:2; Isa 46:10).

2. Now from this infallible foresight, it is most easy and rational
to conclude, and that positively, the infallible overthrow of
every such creature. Did I infallibly foresee that this or that
man would cut out his heart in the morning, I might infallibly
determine his death before night.

Object. But still the question is, Whether God by this his determination
doth not lay a necessity on the creature to sin? For, no sin, no
condemnation: this is true by your own assertion.

Ans. No, by no means: for,

1. Though it be true, that sin must of absolute necessity go
before the infallible condemnation and overthrow of the sinner;
and that it must also be pre-considered by God; yet it needs not
lay a necessity upon him to sin: for let him but alone to do what
he will, and the determination cannot be more infallible than the
sin, which is the cause of its execution.

2. As it needs not, so it doth not: for this positive determination is
not grounded upon what God will effect, but on what the creature
will; and that not through the instigation of God, but the
instigation of the devil. What? might not I, if I most undoubtedly
foresaw that such a tree in my garden would only cumber the ground,
notwithstanding reasonable means, might not I, I say, from hence
determine, seven years before, to cut it down, and burn it in the
fire, but I must, by so determining, necessitate this tree to be
fruitless? the case in hand is the very same. God therefore may
most positively determine the infallible damnation of his creature,
and yet not at all necessitate the creature to sin, that he might
be damned.

Object. But how is this similitude pertinent? For God did not only
foresee sin would be the destruction of the creature, but let it
come into the world, and so destroy the creature. If you, as you
foresee the fruitlessness of your tree, should withal see that
which makes it so, and that too before it makes it so, and yet let
the impediment come and make it so; are not you now the cause of
the unfruitfulness of that tree which you have before condemned to
the fire to be burned? for God might have chose whether he would
have let Adam sin, and so sin to have got into the world by him.

Ans. Similitudes never answer every way; if they be pertinent to
that for which they are intended, it is enough; and to that it
answereth well, being brought to prove no more but the natural
consequence of a true and infallible foresight. And now as to
what is objected further, as that God might have chose whether
sin should have come into the world by Adam, to the destruction
of so many: to that I shall answer,

1. That sin could not have come into the world without God's
permission, it is evident, both from the perfection of his foresight
and power.

2. Therefore all the means, motives, and inducements thereunto,
must also by him be not only foreseen, but permitted.

3. Yet so, that God will have the timing, proceeding, bounding,
and ordering thereof, at his disposal: 'Surely the wrath of man
shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain'
(Psa 76:10; 1 Kings 22:20-22; John 8:20; Luke 22:51,52).

4. Therefore it must needs come into the world, not without, but
by the knowledge of God; not in despite of him, but by his suffering
of it.

Object. But how then is he clear from having a hand in the death
of him that perisheth?

Ans. Nothing is more sure than that God could have kept sin out
of the world, if it had been his will; and this is also as true,
that it never came into the world with his liking and compliance;
and for this, you must consider that sin came into the world by
two steps:

1. By being offered. 2. By prevailing.

Touching the first of these, God without the least injury to any
creature in heaven or earth, might not only suffer it, but so far
countenance the same: that is, so far forth as for trial only:
as it is said of Abraham; 'God tempted Abraham' to slay his only
son (Gen 22:1), and led Christ by the Spirit into the wilderness
to be tempted of the devil (Mark 1:12; Luke 4:1). This is done
without any harm at all; nay, it rather produceth good; for it
tends to discover sincerity, to exercise faith in, and love to his
Creator; also to put him in mind of the continual need he hath of
depending on his God for the continuation of help and strength,
and to provoke to prayers to God, whenever so engaged (Deut 8:1-3;
1 Peter 1:7; Heb 5:7; Matt 26:22,41).

Object. But God did not only admit that sin should be offered
for trial, and there to stay; but did suffer it to prevail, and
overcome the world.

Ans. Well, this is granted: but yet consider,

1. God did neither suffer it, nor yet consent it should, but under
this consideration; If Adam, upright Adam, gave way thereto, by
forsaking his command, 'In the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shalt surely die' (Gen 2:17, 3:3). Which Adam did, not because
God did compel him or persuade him to it, but voluntarily of his
own mind, contrary to his God's command: so then, God by suffering sin
to break into the world, did it rather in judgment, as disliking
Adam's act, and as a punishment to man for listening to the tempter;
and as a discovery of his anger at man's disobedience; than to
prove that he is guilty of the misery of his creature.

2. Consider also, that when God permitted sin for trial, it was,
when offered first, to them only who were upright, and had sufficient
strength to resist it.

3. They were by God's command to the contrary, driven to no strait
to tempt them to incline to Satan: 'Of every tree of the garden
thou mayest freely at,' saith God; only let this alone.

4. As touching the beauty and goodness that was in the object unto
which they were allured; What was it? Was it better than God? Yea,
was it better than the tree of life? For from that they were not
exempted till after they had sinned. Did not God know best what
was best to do them good?

5. Touching him that persuaded them to do this wicked act; was
his word more to be valued for truth, more to be ventured on for
safety, or more to be honoured for the worthiness of him that
spake, than was his that had forbad it? The one being the devil,
with a lie, and to kill them; the other being God, with his truth,
and to preserve them safe.

Quest. But was not Adam unexpectedly surprised? Had he notice
beforehand, and warning of the danger? For God foresaw the business.

Ans. Doubtless God was fair and faithful to his creature in this
thing also; as clearly doth appear from these considerations.

1. The very commandment that God gave him, fore-bespake him well
to look about him; and did indeed insinuate that he was likely to
be tempted.

2. It is yet more evident, because God doth even tell him of the
danger; 'In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
die.'

3. Nay God by speaking to him of the very tree that was to be
forborn, telling him also where it stood, that he might the better
know it; did in effect expressly say unto him, Adam, if thou
be tempted, it will be about that tree, and the fruit thereof:
wherefore if thou findest the tempter there, then beware thy life.

(1.) To conclude then: though sin did not come into the world
without God's sufferance, yet it did without his liking: God suffered
also Cain to kill his brother, and Ishmael to mock at Isaac, but
he did not like the same (Gen 4:9-11; Gal 4:30).

(2.) Therefore though God was first in concluding sin should be
offered to the world; yet man was the first that consented to a
being overcome thereby.

(3.) Then, Though God did fore-determine that sin should enter,
yet it was not but with respect to certain terms and conditions,
which yet was not to be enforced by virtue of the determination,
but permitted to be completed by the voluntary inclination of a
perfect and upright man. And in that the determination was most
perfectly infallible, it was through the foresight of the undoubted
inclination of this good and upright person.

Quest. But might not God have kept Adam from inclining, if he
would?

Ans. What more certain? But yet consider,

1. Adam being now an upright man, he was able to have kept himself,
had he but looked to it as he should and might.

2. This being so, if God had here stept in, he had either added
that which had been needless, and so had not obtained thankfulness;
or else had made the strength of Adam useless, yea his own workmanship
in so creating him, superfluous; or else by consequence imperfect.

(3.) If he had done so, he had taken Adam from his duty, which was
to trust and believe his Maker; he had also made void the end of
the commandment, which was to persuade to watchfulness, diligence,
sobriety, and contentedness; yea, and by so doing would not only
himself have tempted Adam to transgression, even to lay aside the
exercise of that strength that God had already given him; but should
have become the pattern, or the first father to all looseness,
idleness, and neglect of duty. Which would also not only have
been an ill example to Adam to continue to neglect so reasonable
and wholesome duties, but would have been to himself an argument
of defence to retort upon his God, when he had come at another
time to reckon with him for his misdemeanours.[6]

Many other weighty reasons might here be further added for God's
vindication in this particular, but at this time let these suffice.


CHAPTER 7.

Whether any under Eternal Reprobation have just cause to quarrel
with God for not electing of them?

That the answer to this question may be to edification, recall
again what I have before asserted; to wit, That for a man to
be left out of God's election, and to be made a sinner, is two
things; and again, For a man to be not elect, and to be condemned
to hell-fire, is two things also. Now I say, if non-election
makes no man a sinner, and if it appoints no man to condemnation
neither, then what ground hath any reprobate to quarrel with God
for not electing of him? Nay, further, reprobation considereth him
upright, leaveth him upright, and so turneth him into the world;
what wrong doth God do him, though he hath not elected him? What
reason hath he that is left in this case to quarrel against his
Maker?

If thou say, because God hath not chosen them, as well as chosen
others: I answer, 'Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest
against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it,
Why hast thou made me thus?' (Rom 9:20). 'Behold, as the clay is
in the potter's hand, so are ye in my hand, O house of Israel,'
saith the Lord God (Jer 18:6). So then, if I should say no more but
that God is the only Lord and Creator, and that by his sovereignty
he hath power to dispose of them according to his pleasure, either
to choose or to refuse, according to the counsel of his own will,
who could object against him and be guiltless? 'He giveth not
account of any of his matters' (Job 33:13). 'And what his soul
desireth, even that he doeth' (Job 23:13).

Again, God is wiser than man, and therefore can shew a reason for
what he acts and does, both when and where at present thou seest
none. Shall God the only wise, be arraigned at the bar of thy
blind reason, and there be judged and condemned for his acts done
in eternity? Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, 'or who
hath been his counsellor?' (Rom 11:34). Do you not know that he
is far more above us, than we are above our horse or mule that is
without understanding? 'Great things doeth he, which we cannot
comprehend' (Job 37:5). 'Great things and unsearchable, marvellous
things without number' (Job 5:9).

But, I say, should we take it well if our beast should call
us to account for this and the other righteous act, and judge us
unrighteous, and our acts ridiculous, and all because it sees no
reason for our so doing? Why, we are as beasts before God (Psa
73:22).

But again, to come yet more close to the point: the reprobate
quarrels with God, because he hath not elected him; well, but is
not God the master of his own love? And is not his will the only
rule of his mercy? And may he not, without he give offence to thee,
lay hold by electing love and mercy on whom himself pleaseth? Must
thy reason, nay, thy lust, be the ruler, orderer, and disposer of
his grace? 'Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own?' saith he, 'Is thine eye evil, because I am good?' (Matt
20:15).

Further, What harm doth God to any reprobate, by not electing of
him; he was, as hath been said, considered upright, so formed in
the act of creation, and so turned into the world: indeed he was
not elected, but hath that taken anything from him? No, verily,
but leaveth him in good condition: there is good, and better, and
best of all; he that is in a good estate, though others through
free grace are in a far better, hath not any cause to murmur either
with him that gave him such a place, or at him that is placed above
him. In a word, reprobation maketh no man personally a sinner,
neither doth election make any man personally righteous. It is the
consenting to sin that makes a man a sinner; and the imputation of
grace and righteousness that makes [men] gospelly and personally
just and holy.

But again, seeing it is God's act to leave some out of the bounds
of his election, it must needs be, therefore, positively good: Is
that then which is good in itself made sin unto thee? God forbid:
God doth not evil by leaving this or that man out of his electing
grace, though he choose others to eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Wherefore there is not a reprobate that hath any
cause, and therefore no just cause, to quarrel with his Maker,
for not electing of him.

And that, besides what hath been spoken, if you consider,

1. For God to elect, is an act of sovereign grace; but to pass
by, or to refuse so to do, is an act of sovereign power, not of
injustice.

2. God might therefore have chosen whether he would have elected
any, or so many or few; and also which and where he would.

3. Seeing then that all things are at his dispose, he may fasten
electing mercy where he pleaseth; and other mercy, if he will, to
whom and when he will.

4. Seeing also that the least of mercies are not deserved by the
best of sinners; men, instead of quarrelling against the God of
grace, because they have not what they list, should acknowledge
they are unworthy of their breath; and also should confess that
God may give mercy where he pleaseth, and that too, both which
or what, as also to whom, and when he will; and yet be good, and
just, and very gracious still: Nay, Job saith, 'He taketh away,
who can hinder him? Who will say unto him, What doest thou?' (Job
9:12).

The will of God is the rule of all righteousness, neither knoweth
he any other way by which he governeth and ordereth any of
his actions. Whatsoever God doth, it is good because he doth it;
whether it be to give grace, or to detain it; whether in choosing
or refusing. The consideration of this, made the holy men of old
ascribe righteousness to their Maker, even then when yet they
could not see the reason of his actions. They would rather stand
amazed, and wonder at the heights and depths of his unsearchable
judgments, than quarrel at the strange and most obscure of them
(Job 34:10-12, 36:3, 37:23; Jer 12:1; Rom 11:33).

God did not intend that all that ever he would do, should be known
to every man, no nor yet to the wise and prudent. It is as much
a duty sometimes to stay ourselves and wonder, and to confess our
ignorance in many things of God, as it is to do other things that
are duty without dispute. So then, let poor dust and ashes forbear
to condemn the Lord, because he goeth beyond them; and also they
should beware they speak not wickedly for him, though it be, as
they think, to justify his actions. 'The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works' (Psa 145:17; Matt 11:25; 1
Cor 2:8; Job 13:6-8).[7]


CHAPTER 8.

Whether Eternal reprobation in itself, or in its doctrine, be in
very deed an hindrance to any man in seeking the salvation of his
soul.

In my discourse upon this question, I must entreat the reader to
mind well what is premised in the beginning of the former chapter,
which is, That reprobation makes no man a sinner, appoints no
man to condemnation, but leaveth him upright after all. So then,
though God doth leave this most of men without the bounds of his
election, his so doing is neither in itself, nor yet its doctrine,
in very deed, an hindrance to any man in seeking the salvation of
his soul.

First, It hindreth not in itself, as is clear by the ensuing
considerations:--

1. That which hindreth him is the weakness that came upon him by
reason of sin. Now God only made the man, but man's listening to
Satan made him a sinner, which is the cause of all his weakness:
this therefore is it that hindreth him, and that also disenableth
him in seeking the salvation of his soul. 'Let no man say when he
is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with
evil, neither tempteth he any man' (James 1:13). 'God made man
upright; but they have sought out many inventions' (Eccl 7:29;
Eze 16:30; Hosea 13:9, 14:1; Gen 3:8-11).

2. It hindreth not in itself, for it taketh not anything from a
man that would help him, might it continue with him; it takes not
away the least part of his strength, wisdom, courage, innocency,
or will to good; all these were lost by the fall, in that day when
he died the death. Nay, reprobation under some consideration did
rather establish all these upon the reprobate; for as it decrees
him left, so left upright. Wherefore man's hindrance cometh on him
from other means, even by the fall, and not by the simple act of
eternal reprobation (Gen 3).

3. As reprobation hindreth not either of these two ways, so neither
is it from this simple act that Satan is permitted either to tempt
them, that they might be tried, or that they might be overthrown.

(1.) It is not by this act that Satan is permitted to tempt them
that they might be tried; because then the Son of God himself must
be reached by this reprobation; he being tempted by the devil as
much, if not more than any. Yea, and then must every one of the
elect be under eternal reprobation; for they also, and that after
their conversion, are greatly assaulted by him. 'Many are the
troubles of the righteous,' &c. (Matt 4:1,2; Heb 2:17, 4:15).

(2.) Neither is it from the act of reprobation that sin hath
entered the world, no more than from election, because those under
the power of election did not only fall at first, but do still
generally as foully, before conversion, as the reprobate himself.
Whereas, if either the temptation, or the fall, were by virtue of
reprobation, then the reprobates, and they only, should have been
tempted, and have fallen. The temptation then, and the fall, doth
come from other means, and so the hindrance of the reprobate,
than from eternal reprobation. For the temptation, the fall and
hindrance being universal, but the act of reprobation particular,
the hindrance must needs come from such a cause as taketh hold on
all men, which indeed is the fall; the cause of which was neither
election nor reprobation, but man's voluntary listening to the
tempter (Rom 3:9).

(3.) It is yet far more evident that reprobation hindreth no man
from seeking the salvation of his soul: because notwithstanding all
that reprobation doth, yet God giveth to divers of the reprobates
great encouragements thereto; to wit, the tenders of the gospel
in general, not excluding any; great light also to understand it,
with many a sweet taste of the good word of God, and the powers of
the world to come; he maketh them sometimes also to be partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and admitteth many of them into fellowship
with his elect; yea, some of them to be rulers, teachers, and
governors in his house: all which, without doubt, both are and
ought to be great encouragements even to the reprobates themselves,
to seek the salvation of their souls (Matt 11:28; Rev 22:17; Heb
6:4,5; Matt 25:1,2; Acts 1:16,17).

Second, As it hindreth not in itself, so it hindreth not by its
doctrine: for, all that this doctrine saith is, that some are left
out of God's election, as considered upright. Now this doctrine
cannot hinder any man. For,

1. No man still stands upright.

2. Though it saith some are left, yet it points at no man, it
nameth no man, it binds all faces in secret. So then, if it hinder,
it hindreth all, even the elect as well as reprobate; for the
reprobate hath as much ground to judge himself elect, as the very
elect himself hath, before he be converted, being both alike in a
state of nature and unbelief, and both alike visibly liable to the
curse, for the breach of the commandment. Again, As they are equals
here, so also have they ground alike to close in with Christ and
live; even the open, free, and full invitation of the gospel, and
promise of life and salvation, by the faith of Jesus Christ (Eph
2:1,2; Rom 3:9; John 3:16; 2 Cor 5:19-21; Rev 21:6, 22:17).

3. It is evident also by experience, that this doctrine doth not,
in deed, neither can it hinder any (this doctrine I mean, when
both rightly stated and rightly used) because many who have been
greatly afflicted about this matter, have yet at last had comfort;
which comfort, when they have received it, hath been to them as
an argument that the thing they feared before, was not because of
reprobation rightly stated; but its doctrine much abused was the
cause of their affliction: and had they had the same light at
first they received afterwards, their troubles then would soon
have fled, as also now they do. Wherefore discouragement comes
from want of light, because they are not skilful in the word
of righteousness: for had the discouragement at first been true,
which yet it could not be, unless the person knew by name himself
under eternal reprobation, which is indeed impossible, then his
light would have pinched him harder; light would rather have fastened
this his fear, than at all have rid him of it (Heb 5:12-14).

Indeed the scripture saith, the word is to some the savour of death
unto death, when to others the savour of life unto life. But mark,
it is not this doctrine in particular, if so much as some other,
that doth destroy the reprobate. It was respited at which Pharaoh
hardened his heart; and the grace of God that the reprobates of
old did turn into lasciviousness. Yea, Christ the Saviour of the
world, is a stumbling-block unto some, and a rock of offence unto
others. But yet again, consider that neither HE, nor any of God's
doctrines, are so simply, and in their own true natural force and
drift: for they beget no unbelief, they provoke to no wantonness,
neither do they in the least encourage to impenitency; all this
comes from that ignorance and wickedness that came by the fall:
Wherefore it is by reason of that also, that they stumble, and
fall, and grow weak, and are discouraged, and split themselves,
either at the doctrine of reprobation, or at any other truth of
God (Exo 8:15; Jude 4:1; 1 Peter 2:8).

Lastly, To conclude as I began, there is no man while in this world,
that doth certainly know that he is left out of the electing love
of the great God; neither hath he any word in the whole bible, to
persuade him so to conclude and believe; for the scriptures hold
forth salvation to the greatest of sinners. Wherefore, though
the act of reprobation were far more harsh, and its doctrine also
more sharp and severe, yet it cannot properly be said to hinder
any. It is a foolish thing in any to be troubled with those
things which they have no ground to believe concerns themselves;
especially when the latitude of their discouragement is touching
their own persons only. 'The secret things belong unto the Lord
our God' (Deut 29:29). Indeed every one of the words of God ought
to put us upon examination, and into a serious enquiry of our
present state and condition, and how we now do stand for eternity; to
wit, whether we are ready to meet the Lord, or how it is with us.
Yet, when search is fully made, and the worst come unto the worst,
the party can find himself no more than the chief of sinners, not
excluded from the grace of God tendered in the gospel; not from an
invitation, nay a promise, to be embraced and blest, if he comes
to Jesus Christ. Wherefore he hath no ground to be discouraged by
the doctrine of reprobation (1 Tim 1:15; Acts 3:19; 2 Chron 33;
John 7:37, 6:37; Mark 2:17).


CHAPTER 9.

Whether God would indeed and in truth, that the gospel, with the
grace thereof, should be tendered to those that yet he hath bound
up under Eternal Reprobation?

To this question I shall answer,

First, In the language of our Lord, 'Go preach the gospel unto
every creature' (Mark 16:15); and again, 'Look unto me, and be
ye saved; all ye ends of the earth' (Isa 45:22). 'And whosoever
will, let him take the water of life freely' (Rev 22:17). And the
reason is, because Christ died for all, 'tasted death for every
man' (2 Cor 5:15; Heb 2:9); is 'the Saviour of the world' (1 John
4:14), and the propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

Second, I gather it from those several censures that even every
one goeth under, that doth not receive Christ, when offered in the
general tenders of the gospel; 'He that believeth not,--shall be
damned' (Mark 16:16); 'He that believeth not God hath made him
a liar, because he believeth not the record that God gave of his
son' (1 John 5:10); and, Woe unto thee Capernaum, 'Woe unto thee
Chorazin! woe unto thee Bethsaida!' (Matt 11:21) with many other
sayings, all which words, with many other of the same nature,
carry in them a very great argument to this very purpose; for if
those that perish in the days of the gospel, shall have, at least,
their damnation heightened, because they have neglected and refused
to receive the gospel, it must needs be that the gospel was with
all faithfulness to be tendered unto them; the which it could not
be, unless the death of Christ did extend itself unto them (John
3:16; Heb 2:3); for the offer of the gospel cannot, with God's
allowance, be offered any further than the death of Jesus Christ
doth go; because if that be taken away, there is indeed no gospel,
nor grace to be extended. Besides, if by every creature, and the
like, should be meant only the elect, then are all the persuasions
of the gospel to no effect at all; for still the unconverted,
who are here condemned for refusing of it, they return it as fast
again: I do not know I am elect, and therefore dare not come to
Jesus Christ; for if the death of Jesus Christ, and so the general
tender of the gospel, concern the elect alone; I, not knowing
myself to be one of that number, am at a mighty plunge; nor know
I whether is the greater sin, to believe, or to despair: for I say
again, if Christ died only for the elect, &c. then, I not knowing
myself to be one of that number, dare not believe the gospel,
that holds forth his blood to save me; nay, I think with safety
may not, until I first do know I am elect of God, and appointed
thereunto.

Third, God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son, would have all
men whatever, invited by the gospel to lay hold of life by Christ,
whether elect or reprobate; for though it be true, that there is
such a thing as election and reprobation, yet God, by the tenders
of the gospel in the ministry of his word, looks upon men under
another consideration, to wit, as sinners; and as sinners invites
them to believe, lay hold of, and embrace the same. He saith not
to his ministers, Go preach to the elect, because they are elect;
and shut out others, because they are not so: But, Go preach the
gospel to sinners as sinners; and as they are such, go bid them
come to me and live. And it must needs be so, otherwise the preacher
could neither speak in faith, nor the people hear in faith. First,
the preacher could not speak in faith, because he knoweth not the
elect from the reprobate; nor they again hear in faith, because,
as unconverted, they would be always ignorant of that also. So
then, the minister neither knowing whom he should offer life unto,
nor yet the people which of them are to receive it; how could
the word now be preached in faith with power? And how could the
people believe and embrace it? But now the preacher offering mercy
in the gospel to sinners, as they are sinners, here is way made
for the word to be spoke in faith, because his hearers are sinners;
yea, and encouragement also for the people to receive and close
therewith, they understanding they are sinners: 'Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners' (1 Tim 1:15; Luke 24:46,47).

Fourth, The gospel must be preached to sinners as they are sinners,
without distinction of elect or reprobate; because neither the
one nor yet the other, as considered under these simple acts, are
fit subjects to embrace the gospel: for neither the one act, nor
yet the other, doth make either of them sinners; but the gospel
is to be tendered to men as they are sinners, and personally under
the curse of God for sin: wherefore to proffer grace to the elect
because they are elect, it is to proffer grace and mercy to them,
as not considering them as sinners. And, I say, to deny it to the
reprobate, because he is not elected, it is not only a denial of
grace to them that have no need thereof, but also before occasion
is given on their part, for such a dispensation. And I say again,
therefore, to offer Christ and grace to man elect, as simply so
considered, this administers to him no comfort at all, he being
here no sinner; and so engageth not the heart at all to Jesus
Christ; for that comes in, and is effected on them as they are
sinners. Yea, to deny the gospel also to the reprobate, because
he is not elect, it will not trouble him at all; for saith he, So
I am not a sinner, and so do not need a Saviour. But now, because
the elect have no need of grace in Christ by the gospel, but as
they are sinners; nor the reprobates cause to refuse it, but as
they are sinners; therefore Christ by the word of the gospel, is
to be proffered to both, without considering elect or reprobate,
even as they are sinners. 'The whole have no need of the physician,
but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance' (Mark 2:17; 2 Cor 5:14,15; Luke 7:47).

Thus you see the gospel is to be tendered to all in general, as
well to the reprobate as to the elect, TO SINNERS AS SINNERS; and
so are they to receive it, and to close with the tenders thereof.[8]


CHAPTER 10.

Seeing then that the grace of God in the gospel, is by that to
be proffered to sinners, as sinners; as well to the reprobate as
the elect; Is it possible for those who indeed are not elect, to
receive it, and be saved?

To this question I shall answer several things: but first I shall
shew you what that grace is, that is tendered in the gospel; and
secondly, what it is to receive it and be saved.

First then, The grace that is offered to sinners as sinners,
without respect to this or that person, it is a sufficiency of
righteousness, pardoning grace, and life, laid up in the person
of Christ, held forth in the exhortation and word of the gospel,
and promised to be theirs that receive it; yea, I say, in so
universal a tender, that not one is by it excluded or checked in
the least, but rather encouraged, if he hath the least desire to
life; yea, it is held forth to beget both desires and longings
after the life thus laid up in Christ, and held forth by the
gospel (John 1:16; Col 1:19,23; 1 John 5:11,12; Acts 13:38,39;
Rom 10:12-14, 16:25,26).

Secondly, To receive this grace thus tendered by the gospel, it
is,

1. To believe it is true.

2. To receive it heartily and unfeignedly through faith. And,

3. To let it have its natural sway, course and authority in the
soul, and that in that measure, as to bring forth the fruits of
good living in heart, word, and life, both before God and man.

Now then to the question.

Is it possible that this tender, thus offered to the reprobate,
should by him be thus received and embraced, and he live thereby?

To which I answer in the negative. Nor yet for the elect themselves,
I mean as considered dead in trespasses and sins, which is the state
of all men, elect as well as reprobate. So then, though there be
a sufficiency of life and righteousness laid up in Christ for all
men, and this tendered by the gospel to them without exception;
yet sin coming in between the soul and the tender of this grace,
it hath in truth disabled all men, and so, notwithstanding this
tender, they continue to be dead. For the gospel, I say, coming in
word only, saveth no man, because of man's impediment; wherefore
those that indeed are saved by this gospel, the word comes not to
them in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost; is
mixed with faith even with the faith of the operation of God, by
whose exceeding great and mighty power they are raised from this
death of sin, and enabled to embrace the gospel. Doubtless, all
men being dead in trespasses and sins, and so captivated under the
power of the devil, the curse of the law, and shut up in unbelief;
it must be the power of God, yea the exceeding greatness of that
power that raiseth the soul from this condition, to receive the
holy gospel (Eph 2:1-3; 1 Thess 1:5,6; Col 2:12; Heb 4:1,2; Eph
1:18,19, &c.).

For man by nature, (consider him at best), can see no more, nor do
no more than what the principles of nature understands and helps
to do; which nature being below the discerning of things truly,
spiritually, and savingly good, it must needs fall short of receiving,
loving and delighting in them. 'The natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him:
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned'
(1 Cor 2:14). Now I say, if the natural man at best (for the elect
before conversion are no more, if quite so much) cannot do this,
how shall they attain thereto, being now not only corrupted
and infected, but depraved, bewitched and dead; swallowed up of
unbelief, ignorance, confusion, hardness of heart, hatred of God,
and the like? When a thorn by nature beareth grapes, and a thistle
beareth figs, then may this thing be (Matt 7:16-18). To lay hold
of and receive the gospel by a true and saving faith, it is an
act of the soul as made a new creature, which is the workmanship
of God: 'Now he that hath wrought us for the self-same thing
is God' (2 Cor 5:5). 'For a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit' (Luke 6:43-45). 'Can the Ethiopian change his skin?' (Jer
13:23).

But yet the cause of this impossibility.

1. Lieth not in reprobation, the elect themselves being as much
unable to receive it as the other.

2. Neither is it because the reprobate is excluded in the tender,
for that is universal.

3. Neither is it because there wanteth arguments in the tenders
of the gospel, for there is not only plenty, but such as be
persuasive, clear, and full of rationality.

4. Neither is it because these creatures have no need thereof,
for they have broken the law.

5. Wherefore it is, because indeed they are by sin dead, captivated,
mad, self-opposers, blind, alienated in their minds, and haters
of the Lord. Behold the ruins that sin hath made!

Wherefore whoever receiveth the grace that is tendered in the
gospel, they must be quickened by the power of God, their eyes must
be opened, their understandings illuminated, their ears unstopped,
their hearts circumcised, their wills also rectified, and the Son
of God revealed in them. Yet as I said, not because there wanteth
argument in these tenders, but because men are dead, and blind,
and cannot hear the word. 'Why do ye not understand my speech
[saith Christ]; Even because ye cannot hear my word' (John 8:43;
Acts 9:15, 26:9,10; Psa 110:3; Gal 1:15; Matt 11:27).

For otherwise, as I said but now, there is, 1. Rationality enough
in the tenders of the gospel. 2. Persuasions of weight enough to
provoke to faith. And, 3. Arguments enough to persuade to continue
therein.

1. Is it not reasonable that man should believe God in the proffer
of the gospel and life by it? Is there not reason, I say, both
from the truth and faithfulness of God, from the sufficiency of the
merits of Christ, as also from the freeness and fullness of the
promise? What unreasonable thing doth the gospel bid thee credit?
Or what falsehood doth it command thee to receive for truth? Indeed
in many points the gospel is above reason, but yet in never a one
against it; especially in those things wherein it beginneth with
the sinner, in order to eternal life.

2. Again, touching its persuasions to provoke to faith: With how
many signs and wonders, miracles and mighty deeds, hath it been
once and again confirmed, and that to this very end? (Heb 1:1-3;
1 Cor 14:22). With how many oaths, declarations, attestations, and
proclamations, is it avouched, confirmed, and established? (Heb
6:17,18; Acts 13:32; Jer 3:12; Gal 3:15). And why should not
credence be given to that gospel that is confirmed by blood, the
blood of the Son of God himself? Yea, that gospel that did never
yet fail any that in truth hath cast themselves upon it, since
the foundation of the world (Heb 9:16-18, 12:1-3).

3. Again, as there is rationality enough, and persuasions sufficient,
so there is also argument most prevalent to persuade to continue
therein, and that to heartily, cheerfully, and unfeignedly, unto
the end: did not, as I have said, blindness, madness, deadness, and
willful rebellion, carry them away in the vanity of their minds,
and overcome them (Eph 4:17-19).

(1.) For, first, if they could but consider how they have sinned,
how they have provoked God, &c., if they could but consider what
a dismal state the state of the damned is, and also, that in
a moment their condition is like to be the same, would they not
cleave to the gospel and live?

(2.) The enjoyment of God, and Christ, and saints, and angels,
being the sweetest; the pleasures of heaven the most comfortable,
and to live always in the greatest height of light, life, joy,
and gladness imaginable, one would think were enough to persuade
the very damned now in hell.

There is no man then perisheth for want of sufficient reason in the
tenders of the gospel, nor any for want of persuasions to faith;
nor yet because there wanteth arguments to provoke to continue
therein. But the truth is, the gospel in this hath to do with
unreasonable creatures; with such as will not believe it, and that
because it is truth: 'And because I tell you the truth, [saith
Christ] therefore ye believe me not' (John 8:45).

Quest. Well, but if this in truth be thus, how then comes it to
pass that some receive it and live for ever? For you have said
before, that the elect are as dead as the reprobate, and full as
unable as they, as men, to close with these tenders, and live.

Answ. Doubtless this is true, and were the elect left to themselves,
they, through the wickedness of their heart, would perish as
do others. Neither could all the reasonable persuasive prevalent
arguments of the gospel of God in Christ, prevail to make any
receive it, and live. Wherefore here you must consider, that as
there is mercy proclaimed in the general tenders of the gospel,
so there is also the grace of election; which grace kindly
over-ruleth and winneth the spirit of the chosen, working in them
that unfeigned closing therewith, that makes it effectual to their
undoubted salvation; which indeed is the cause that not only in
other ages, but also to this day, there is a remnant that receive
this grace; they being appointed, I say, thereto, before the
world began; preserved in time from that which would undo them,
and enabled to embrace the glorious gospel of grace, and peace,
and life (1 Kings 19:18; Rom 11:5; 1 Thess 5:9).

Now there is a great difference between the grace of election, and
the grace that is wrapped up in the general tenders of the gospel
a difference, I say, and that both as to its timing, latituding,
and working.

1. Touching its timing; it is before, yea long before, there was
either tender of the grace wrapped up in the gospel to any, or
any need of such a tender (Eph 1:4,5).

2. They also differ in latitude; the tenders of grace in the
gospel are common and universal to all, but the extension of that
of election special and peculiar to some. 'There is a remnant
according to the election of grace' (Rom 11:5).

3. Touching the working of the grace of election; it differs much
in some things from the working of the grace that is offered in the
general tenders of the gospel. As is manifest in these particulars:

(1.). The grace that is offered in the general tenders of the
gospel, calleth for faith to lay hold upon, and accept thereof;
but the special grace of election, worketh that faith which doth
lay hold thereof (Acts 16:31, 13:48; Phil 1:29; 2 Thess 1:11).

(2.) The grace that is offered in the general tenders of the gospel,
calleth for faith, as a condition in us, without which there is
no life; but the special grace of election worketh faith in us
without any such condition (Mark 16:15,16; Rom 11:5,6).

(3.) The grace that is offered in the general tenders of the
gospel, promiseth happiness upon the condition of persevering in
the faith only; but the special grace of election causeth this
perseverance (Col 1:23; Eph 2:10; Rom 11:7; 1 Peter 1:5-7).

(4.) The grace offered in the general tenders of the gospel, when
it sparkleth most, leaveth the greatest part of men behind it;
but the special grace of election, when it shineth least, doth
infallibly bring every soul therein concerned to everlasting life
(Rom 10:16, 8:33-35).

(5.) A man may overcome and put out all the light and life that
is begotten in him by the general tenders of the gospel; but none
shall overcome, or make void, or frustrate the grace of election
(Jude 4; 2 Peter 2:20-22; Matt 24:24; Rom 11:1-3, &c.).

(6.) The general tenders of the gospel, considered without a
concurrence of the grace of election, helps not the elect himself,
when sadly fallen. Wherefore, when I say the grace that is offered
in the general tenders of the gospel, I mean that grace when
offered, as not being accompanied with a special operation of
God's eternal love, by way of conjunction therewith. Otherwise
the grace that is tendered in the general offers of the gospel,
is that which saveth the sinner now, and that brings him to
everlasting life; that is, when conjoined with that grace that
blesseth and maketh this general tender effectually efficacious.
The grace of election worketh not without, but by these tenders
generally; neither doth the grace thus tendered, effectually work,
but by and with the grace of election: 'As many as were ordained
to eternal life believed' (Acts 13:48): The word being then effectual
to life, when the hand of the Lord is effectually therewith to that
end (Mark 16:20). They 'spake [saith the text] unto the Grecians,
preaching the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them;
and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord' (Acts
11:20,21).

We must always put difference between the word of the gospel, and
the power that manageth that word; we must put difference between
the common and more special operations of that power also; even as
there is evidently a difference to be put between those words of
Christ that were effectual to do what was said, and of those words of
his which were but words only, or at least not so accompanied with
power. As for instance: that same Jesus that said to the Leper,
'Say nothing to any man,' said also to Lazarus, 'Come forth';
yet the one obeyed, the other did not; though he that obeyed was
least in a capacity to do it, he being now dead, and stunk in his
grave. Indeed unbelief hath hindered Christ much, yet not when he
putteth forth himself as Almighty, but when he doth suffer himself
by them to be abused who are to be dealt with by ordinary means:
Otherwise legions of devils, with ten thousand impediments, must
fall down before him, and give way unto him. There is a speaking,
and a so speaking: 'They so spake, that a great multitude, both
of the Jews, and also of the Greeks, believed' (Acts 14:1). Even
as I have hinted already, there is a difference between the coming
of the word when it is in power (1 Thess 1:5), and when it is in
word only. So then, the blessed grace of election chooseth this
man to good, not because he is good; it chooseth him to believe,
not because he doth believe; it chooseth him to persevere, not
because he doth so; it fore-ordains that this man shall be created
in Christ Jesus unto good works (Eph 1:4-6), not if a man will
create himself thereto (1 Peter 1:2; Eph 2:10).

What shall we say then? Is the fault in God, if any perish?
Doubtless no; nor yet in his act of eternal reprobation neither:
it is grace that saveth the elect, but sin that damns the rest:
it is superabundant grace that causeth the elect to close with the
tenders of life, and live; and it is the aboundings of sin that
holds off the reprobate from the rational, necessary, and absolute
tenders, of grace. To conclude then; the gospel calleth for credence
as a condition, and that both from the elect and reprobate; but
because none of them both, as dead in sin, will close therewith,
and live; therefore grace, by virtue of electing love, puts forth
itself to work and do for some beyond reason; and justice cuts
off others, for slighting so good, so gracious, and necessary a
means of salvation, so full both of kindness, mercy and reason.


CHAPTER 11.

Seeing [that] it is not possible that the reprobate should receive
this grace and live, and also seeing [that] this is infallibly
foreseen of God; and again, seeing God hath fore-determined
to suffer it so to be; Why doth he yet will and command that the
gospel, and so grace in the general tenders thereof, should be
proffered unto them?

Why then is the gospel offered them? Well, that there is such a
thing as eternal reprobation, I have shewed you; also what this
eternal reprobation is, I have opened unto you: and shall now shew
you also, that though these reprobates will infallibly perish,
which God not only foresaw, but fore-determined to suffer them
most assuredly so to do; yet there is reason, great reason, why
the gospel, and so the grace of God thereby, should be tendered,
and that in general terms, to them as well as others.

But before I come to lay the reasons before you, I must mind you
afresh of these particulars:

1. That eternal reprobation makes no man a sinner.

2. That the fore-knowledge of God that the reprobate would perish
makes no man a sinner.

3. That God's infallibly determining upon the damnation of him
that perisheth, makes no man a sinner.

4. God's patience and long-suffering, and forbearance, until the
reprobate fits himself for eternal destruction, makes no man a
sinner.

So then, God may reprobate, may suffer the reprobate to sin, may
pre-determine his infallible damnation, through the pre-consideration
of him in sin, and may also forbear to work that effectual work
in his soul that would infallibly bring him out of this condition,
and yet neither be the author, contriver, nor means of man's sin
and misery.

Again, God may infallibly foresee that this reprobate, when he
hath sinned, will be an unreasonable opposer of his own salvation;
and may also determine to suffer him to sin, and be thus unreasonable
to the end, yet be gracious, yea very gracious, if he offer him
life, and that only upon reasonable terms, which yet he denieth
to close with (Isa 1:18; 55:12).

The reasons are,

1. Because not God, but sin, hath made him unreasonable; without
which, reasonable terms had done his work for him: for reasonable
terms are the most equal and righteous terms that can be propounded
between parties at difference; yea the terms that most suiteth and
agreeth with a reasonable creature, such as man; nay, reasonable
terms are, for terms, the most apt to work with that man whose
reason is brought into and held captive by very sense itself (Eze
18; 33).

2. God goeth yet further, he addeth promises of mercy, as those
that are inseparable to the terms he offereth, even to pour forth
his Spirit unto them; 'Turn at my reproof, and behold I will pour
forth of my Spirit unto you, and incline your ear; come unto me,
hear and your soul shall live' (Prov 1:23-27).

Now then to the question itself, to wit, that seeing it is impossible
the reprobate should be saved; seeing also this is infallibly
foreseen of God, and seeing also that God hath beforehand determined
to suffer it so to be; yet I shall shew you it is requisite, yea
very requisite, that he should both will and command that the
gospel, and so grace in the general tenders thereof should be
proffered unto them.

FIRST REASON.--And that first, to shew that this reprobation doth
not in itself make any man absolutely incapable of salvation: for
if God had intended that by the act of reprobation, the persons
therein concerned should also by that only act have been made
incapable of everlasting life, then this act must also have tied
up all the means from them, that tendeth to that end; or at least
have debarred the gospel's being offered to them by God's command,
for that intent; otherwise who is there but would have charged the
Holy One as guilty of guile, and worthy of blame, for commanding
that the gospel of grace and salvation should be offered unto
this or that man, whom yet he hath made incapable to receive it,
by his act of reprobation. Wherefore this very thing, to wit, that
the gospel is yet to be tendered to these eternally reprobated,
sheweth that it is not simply the act of God's reprobation, but
sin, that incapacitateth the creature of life everlasting. Which
sin is no branch of this reprobation, as is evident, because the
elect and reprobate are both alike defiled therewith.

SECOND REASON.--God also sheweth by this, that the reprobate do
not perish for want of the offers of salvation, though he hath
offended God, and that upon most righteous terms; according to what
is written, 'As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way,
and live' (Eze 33:11, 18:31,32). 'Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord
of Hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts' (Zech
1:3). So then, here lieth the point between God and the reprobate,
I mean the reprobate since he hath sinned, God is willing to save
him upon reasonable terms, but not upon terms above reason; but
not reasonable terms will [go] down with the reprobate, therefore
he must perish for his unreasonableness.

That God is willing to save even those that perish for ever, is
apparent, both from the consideration of the goodness of his
nature (Psa 145:9), of man's being his creature, and indeed in a
miserable state (Job 14:15, 3:16). But I say, as I have also said
already, there is a great difference between his being willing
to save them, through their complying with these his reasonable
terms, and his being resolved to save them, whether they, as men,
will close therewith, or no; so only he saveth the elect themselves,
even 'according to the riches of his grace' (Eph 1:7). Even
'according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus' (Phil 4:19).
Working effectually in them, what the gospel, as a condition,
calleth for from them. And hence it is that he is said to give
faith (Phil 1:29), yea the most holy faith, for that is the faith
of God's elect, to give repentance (Acts 5:31), to give a new
heart, to give his fear, even that fear that may keep them for
ever from everlasting ruin (Eph 1:4); still engaging his mercy and
goodness to follow them all the days of their lives (Jer 32:40;
Eze 36:26,27), that they may dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever (Psa 23:6), and as another scripture saith, 'Now he that hath
wrought us for the selfsame thing, is God' (2 Cor 5:5; Rom 8:26,
&c.).

But I say, his denying to do thus for every man in the world,
cannot properly be said to be because he is not heartily willing
they should close with the tenders of the grace held forth in
the gospel, and live. Wherefore you must consider that there is
a distinction to be put between God's denying grace on reasonable
terms, and denying it absolutely; and also that there is a difference
between his withholding further grace, and of hindering men from
closing with the grace at present offered; also that God may
withhold much, when he taketh away nothing; yea, take away much,
when once abused, and yet be just and righteous still. Further, God
may deny to do this or that absolutely, when yet he hath promised
to do, not only that, but more, conditionally. Which things
considered, you may with ease conclude, that he may be willing to
save those not elect, upon reasonable terms, though not without
them.

It is no unrighteousness in God to offer grace unto the world,
though but on these terms only, that they are also foreseen by him
infallibly to reject; both because to reject it is unreasonable,
especially the terms being so reasonable, as to believe the truth
and live; and also because it is grace and mercy in God, so much
as once to offer means of reconciliation to a sinner, he being
the offender; but the Lord, the God offended; they being but dust
and ashes, he the heavenly Majesty. If God, when man had broke
the law, had yet with all severity kept the world to the utmost
condition of it, had he then been unjust? Had he injured man at
all? Was not every tittle of the law reasonable, both in the first
and second table? How much more then is he merciful and gracious,
even in but mentioning terms of reconciliation? especially seeing
he is also willing so to condescend, if they will believe his word,
and receive the love of the truth. Though the reprobate then doth
voluntarily, and against all strength of reason, run himself upon
the rocks of eternal misery, and split himself thereon, he perisheth
in his own corruption, by rejecting terms of life (2 Thess 2:10;
2 Peter 2:12,13).

Object. But the reprobate is not now in a capacity to fulfil these
reasonable terms.

Ans. But I say, suppose it should be granted, is it because
reprobation made him incapable, or sin? Not reprobation, but sin:
if sin, then before he quarrel, let him consider the case aright,
where, in the result, he will find sin, being consented to by his
voluntary mind, hath thus disabled him: and because, I say, it
was sin by his voluntary consent that did it, let him quarrel with
himself for consenting, so as to make himself incapable to close
with reasonable terms; yea, with those terms because reasonable,
therefore most suitable, as terms, for him notwithstanding his
wickedness. And I say again, forasmuch as those reasonable terms
have annexed unto them, as their inseperable companions, such
wonderful mercy and grace as indeed there is, let even them that
perish, yet justify God; yea cry, 'His goodness endureth for
ever'; though they, through the wretchedness of their hearts, get
no benefit by it.

THIRD REASON.--God may will and command that his gospel, and so
the grace thereof, be tendered to those that shall never be saved,
(besides what hath been said) to shew to all spectators what an
enemy sin, being once embraced, is to the salvation of man. Sin,
without the tenders of the grace of the gospel, could never have
appeared so exceeding sinful, as by that it both hath and doth: 'If
I had not come and spoken unto them, [saith Christ] they had not
had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin' (John 15:22).
As sins that oppose the law, are discovered by the law, that is,
by the goodness, and justness, and holiness of the law (Rom 7); so
the sins that oppose the gospel, are made manifest by that, even
by the love, and mercy, and forgiveness of the gospel: If 'he
that despised Moses' law died without mercy,--of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden
under foot the Son of God?' (Heb 10:28,29). Who could have thought
that sin would have opposed that which is just, but especially
mercy and grace, had we not seen it with our eyes? And how could
we have seen it to purpose, had not God left some to themselves?
Here indeed is sin made manifest: 'For all he had done so many
miracles amongst them,' (to wit, to persuade them to mercy) 'yet
they believed not on him' (John 12:37). Sin, where it reigneth, is
a mortal enemy to the soul; it blinds the eyes, holds the hands,
ties the legs, and stops the ears, and makes the heart implacable
to resist the Saviour of souls. That man will neither obey the
law nor the gospel, who is left unto his sin: which also God is
willing should be discovered and made manifest, though it cost the
damnation of some: For this very purpose, saith God to Pharaoh,
'have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my
name may be declared in all the earth' (Exo 9:16; Rom 9:17). For
God, by raising up Pharaoh to his kingdom, and suffering him to
walk to the height, according as his sin did prompt him forward,
shewed unto all beholders what a dreadful thing sin is; and that
without the special assistance of his Holy Spirit, sin would
neither be charmed by law nor gospel. This reason, though it be
no profit unto those that are damned; yet it is for the honour of
God, and the good of those he hath chosen.

It is for the honour of God, even for the honour of his power and
mercy: for his power is now discovered indeed, when nothing can
tame sin but that; and his mercy is here seen indeed; because that
doth engage him to do it. Read Romans 9:22,23.

FOURTH REASON.--God commandeth that the tender of the gospel,
and the grace thereof, be in general offered to all, that means
thereby might be sufficiently provided for the elect, both to
beget them to faith, and to maintain it in them to the end, in
what place, or state, or condition soever they are (Eph 1). God,
through the operation of his manifold wisdom, hath an end and an
end in his acts and doings amongst the children of men: and, so in
that he commandeth that his gospel be tendered to all, an end, I
say, to leave the damned without excuse, and to provide sufficiency
of means for the gathering all his elect. 'Oh that God would speak,
[saith Zophar] and open his lips against thee; and--shew thee the
secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is' (Job
11:5,6). For though God worketh with and upon the elect, otherwise
than with and upon the reprobate; yet he worketh with and upon
the elect, with and by the same word he commandeth should be held
forth and offered to the reprobate. Now the text thus running in
most free and universal terms, the elect then hearing thereof, do
through the mighty power of God close in with the tenders therein
held forth, and are saved. Thus that word that was offered to the
reprobate Jews, and by them most fiercely rejected, even that word
became yet effectual to the chosen, and they were saved thereby.
They gladly received the word, 'and as many as were ordained to
eternal life believed' (Acts 13:48).[9] 'Not as though the word
of God had taken none effect' (Rom 9:6). 'God hath not cast away
his people whom he foreknew' (11:2). The word shall accomplish
the thing for which God hath sent it, even the salvation of the
few that are chosen, when tendered to all; though rejected by most,
through the rebellion of their hearts (Acts 28:28; Heb 4:1-3).

Object. But if God hath elected, as you have said, what need he
lay a foundation so general for the begetting faith in his chosen
particulars, seeing the same Spirit that worketh in them by such
means, could also work in them by other, even by a word, excluding
the most, in the first tenders thereof, amongst men?

Ans. I told you before, that though this be a principal reason
of the general tenders of the grace of the gospel, yet it is not
all the reason why the tender should be so general, as the three
former reasons shew.

But again, in the bowels of God's decree of election, is contained
the means that are also ordained for the effectual bringing of
those elected to that glory for which they were fore-appointed;
even to gather together in one, all the children of God (John
11:52). 'Whereunto he called you, [saith Paul] by our gospel,
to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ' (2 Thess
2:14). God's decree of election then, destroyeth not the means
which his wisdom hath prepared, it rather establisheth, yea ordains
and establisheth it; and maketh that means which in the outward
sound is indefinite and general, effectual to this and that man,
through a special and particular application (Gal 2:20,21): thus
that Christ that in general was offered to all, is by a special
act of faith applied to Paul in particular; 'He loved me, and gave
himself for me.'

Further, As the design of the Heavenly Majesty is to bring his elect
to glory by means, so by the means thus universal and general, as
most behooveful and fit; if we consider not only the way it doth
please him to work with some of his chosen, in order to this their
glory, but also the trials, temptations, and other calamities they
must go through thereto.

1. Touching his working with some, how invisible is it to these
in whose souls it is yet begun? How is the word buried under the
clods of their hearts for months, yea years together? Only thus
much is discovered thereof, it sheweth the soul its sin, the which
it doth also so aggravate and apply to the conscience (Jesus still
refraining, like Joseph, to make himself known to his brethren)
that were there not general tenders of mercy, and that to the worst
of sinners, they would soon miscarry, and perish, as do the sons
of perdition. But by these the Lord upholdeth and helpeth them,
that they stand, when others fall for ever (Psa 119:49).

2. And so likewise for their trials, temptations, and other
calamities, because God will not bring them to heaven without,
but by them; therefore he hath also provided a word so large, as
to lie fair for the support of the soul in all conditions, that
it may not die for thirst.

3. I might add also in this place, their imperfect state after
grace received, doth call for such a word; yea, many other things
which might be named: which God, only wise, hath thought fit should
accompany us to the ship, yea in the sea, to our desired haven.

FIFTH REASON.--God willeth and commandeth the gospel should be
offered to all, that thereby distinguishing love, as to an inward
and spiritual work, might the more appear to be indeed the fruit
of special and peculiar love. For in that the gospel is tendered
to all in general, when yet but some do receive it; yea, and seeing
these some are as unable, unwilling, and by nature, as much averse
thereto, as those that refuse it, and perish; it is evident that
something more of heaven and the operation of the Spirit of God
doth accompany the word thus tendered for their life and salvation
that enjoy it (1 Thess 1:4-7). Not now as a word barely tendered,
but backed by the strength of heaven: 'Behold what manner of love
the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
sons of God!' (1 John 3:1) even we who believe 'according to the
working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead' (Eph 1:20). This provoketh to distinguishing
admiration, yea, and also to a love like that which hath fastened
on the called, the preserved, and the glorified: 'He hath not
dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have not
known them. Praise ye the Lord' (Psa 147:20). Now are the sacrifices
bound even to the horns of the altar, with a 'Lord, how is it
that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world!'
(John 14:22). He 'sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of
many waters; he delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them
that hated me; for they were too strong for me' (2 Sam 22:17; Psa
18:16).

For thus the elect considereth: though we all came alike into the
world, and are the children of wrath by nature (Eph 2:1-3); yea,
though we have alike so weakened ourselves by sin (Rom 3:9), that
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint (Isa 1:5), being
altogether gone out of the way, and every one become altogether
unprofitable, both to God and ourselves (Rom 3:12); yet that God
should open mine eyes, convert my soul, give me faith, forgive
my sins, raise me, when I fall; fetch me again, when I am gone
astray; this is wonderful! (Psa 37:23). Yea, that he should prepare
eternal mansions for me (Psa 23:6); and also keep me by his blessed
and mighty power for that; and that in a way of believing, which
without his assistance I am no way able to perform! (2 Cor 5:5).
That he should do this notwithstanding my sins, though I had no
righteousness! (Deut 9:5-7). Yea, that he should do it according
to the riches of his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ our Lord! Even according to an everlasting covenant
of grace, which yet the greatest part of the world are void of,
and will for ever miss and fall short of! (Eze 16:60-63). Besides,
that he should mollify my heart! break it, and then delight in it
(Psa 51:17); put his fear in it, and then look to me (Isa 66:2;
Psa 138:6), and keep me as the apple of his eye (Deut 32:10);
yea, resolve to guide me with his counsel, and then receive me to
glory! Further, that all this should be the effect of unthought
of, undeserved, and undesired love! (Mal 1:2; Deut 7:7,8). That the
Lord should think on this before he made the world (Jer 31:3), and
sufficiently ordain the means before he had laid the foundation of
the hills! For this he is worthy to be praised (1 Cor 2:9): yea,
'Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord; praise ye the
Lord.'

Object. But you have said before, that the reprobate is also blessed
with many gospel mercies, as with the knowledge of Christ, faith,
light, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the tastes or relish of
the powers of the world to come: if so, then what should be the
reason that yet he perisheth? Is it because the grace that he
receiveth differeth from the grace that the elect are saved by?
If they differ, where lieth the difference? Whether in the nature,
or in the degree, or in the management thereof?

Ans. To this objection I might answer many things; but, for brevity,
take this reply: That the non-elect may travel very far both in
the knowledge, faith, light, and sweetness of Jesus Christ, and
may also attain to the partaking of the Holy Ghost; yea, and by
the very operation of these things also, escape the pollutions of
the world, and become a visible saint, join in church-communion,
and be as chief amongst the very elect themselves. This the
scriptures every where do shew us.

The question then is, whether the elect and reprobate receive a
differing grace? To which I answer, Yes, in some respects, both
as to the nature thereof, and also the degree.

1. To begin then with the nature of it.

(1.) The faith that the chosen are blessed with, it goeth under
another name than any faith besides, even the faith of God's elect
(Titus 1:1), as of a faith belonging to them only, of which none
others do partake; which faith also, for the nature of it, is called
faith most holy (Jude 20); to shew it goes beyond all other, and
can be fitly matched no where else, but with their most blessed
faith who infallibly attain eternal glory: even 'like precious faith
with us,' saith Peter (2 Peter 1:1); with his elect companions.
And so of other things. For if this be true, that they differ in
their faith, they must needs therewith differ in other things: for
faith being the mother grace, produceth all the rest according to
its own nature, to wit, love that abounds, that never fails, and
that is never contented till it attain the resurrection of the
dead, &c. (2 Thess 1:3; 1 Cor 13:8; Phil 3).

(2.) They differ as to the nature, in this; the faith, and hope,
and love, that the chosen receive, it is that which floweth from
election itself; he hath blessed us 'according as he hath chosen
us' (Eph 1:4,5), even with those graces he set apart for us, when
he in eternity did appoint us to life before the foundation of the
world: which graces, because the decree in itself is most absolute
and infallible, they also, that they may completely answer the end,
will do the work infallibly likewise, still through the management
of Christ: 'I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not' (Luke
22:32). But,

2. As they differ in nature, they differ also in degree: for though
it be true that the reprobate is blessed with grace, yet this is
also as true, that the elect are blessed with more grace. It is
the privilege only of those that are chosen, to be blessed with
ALL spiritual blessings, and to have ALL the good pleasure of the
goodness of God fulfilled in and upon them. Those who are blessed
with ALL spiritual blessings must needs be blessed with eternal
life; and those in whom the Lord, not only works all his good
pleasure, but fulfilleth all the good pleasure of his goodness
upon them, they must needs be preserved to his heavenly kingdom
(Eph 1:4,5; 1 Thess 1:10); but none of the non-elect have these
things conferred upon them; therefore the grace bestowed upon the
one, doth differ both in nature and degree from the other.

3. There is a difference as to the management also. The reprobate
is principal for the management of the grace he receiveth, but
Jesus Christ is principal for the management of the grace the
elect receiveth. When I say principal, I mean chief; for though
the reprobate is to have the greatest hand in the management of
what mercy and goodness the Lord bestoweth on him, yet not so as
that the Lord will not help him at all; nay contrariwise he will,
if first the reprobate do truly the duty that lieth on him: 'If
thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? but if thou doest
not well, sin lieth at the door' (Gen 4:7). Thus it was also with
Saul, who was rejected of God upon this account (1 Sam 13:11-14,
15:26). And I say, as to the elect themselves, though Jesus Christ
our blessed Saviour be chief, as to the management of the grace
bestowed on his chosen, yet not so as that he quite excludeth
them from 'striving according to his working, which worketh in
me mightily' (Col 1:29). Nay contrariwise, if those who in truth
are elect, shall yet be remiss, and do wickedly, they shall feel
the stroke of God's rod, it may be till their bones do break. But
because the work doth not lie at their door to manage as chief,
but as Christ's, therefore though he may perform his work with
much bitterness and grief to them; yet he being engaged as the
principal, will perform that which concerneth them, even until
the day (the coming) of Jesus Christ (Psa 138:8; Phil 1:6).

From what hath been said, there ariseth this conclusion:

The elect are always under eternal mercy, but those not elect
always under eternal justice; for you must consider this: there
is eternal mercy and eternal justice, and there is present mercy
and present justice. So then, for a man to be in a state of
mercy, it may be either a state of mercy present, or both present
and eternal also. And so again for a man to be in a state under
justice, it may be understood either of present justice only, or
of both present and eternal also.

That this may yet further be opened, I shall somewhat enlarge.

I begin with present mercy and present justice. That which I call
present mercy, is that faith, light, knowledge, and taste of the
good word of God, that a man may have, and perish. This is called
in scripture, Believing for a while, during for a while, and
rejoicing in the light for a season (Heb 6:4,5; 2 Peter 2:20; Matt
13:22; Luke 8:13). Now I call this mercy, both because none, as
men, can deserve it, and also because the proper end thereof is
to do good to those that have it. But I call it present mercy,
because those that are only blessed with that, may sin it away,
and perish; as did some of the Galatians, Hebrews, Alexandrians,
with the Asians, and others (Gal 5:4; Heb 12:15,16; 1 Tim 1:20; 2
Tim 2:18, 1:15; Heb 12:15). But yet observe again, I do not call
this present mercy, because God hath determined it shall last but
a while absolutely; but because it is possible for man to lose
it, yea determined he shall, conditionally (John 5:35; 1 Cor 12:7).

Again, as to present justice, it is that which lasteth but a while
also; and as present mercy is properly the portion of those left
out of God's election, so present justice chiefly hath to do with
God's beloved; who yet at that time are also under eternal mercy.
This is that justice that afflicted Job (6:4), David (Psa 88,
38:3), Heman, and the godly, who notwithstanding do infallibly
attain, by virtue of this mercy, eternal life and glory (Amos
3:2; 1 Cor 11:30,31; Psa 30:5, 103:9; 1 Peter 1:6). I call this
justice, because in some sense God dealeth with his children
according to the quality of their transgressions; and I call
it also present justice, because though the hand of God for the
present be never so heavy on those that are his by election, yet
it lasteth but a while; wherefore though this indeed be called
wrath, yet is but a little wrath, wrath for a moment, time, or
season. 'In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment;
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith
the Lord thy Redeemer' (Isa 54:8).

Thus you see there is present mercy and present justice; also
that the elect may be under present justice, when the rest may be
under present mercy.

Again, As there is present mercy and present justice, so there
is eternal mercy and eternal justice: and I say, as the elect may
be under present justice, when the non-elect may be under present
mercy; so the elect at that time are also under eternal mercy,
but the other under eternal justice.

That the elect are under eternal mercy, and that when under present
justice, is evident from what hath been said before, namely, from
their being chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world;
as also from the consideration of their sound conversion, and
safe preservation quite through this wicked world, even safe unto
eternal life; as he also saith by the prophet Jeremiah, 'Yea, I
have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with loving
kindness have I drawn thee' (31:3). And hence it is that he calleth
the elect his sheep (John 10:16), his children (11:52), and people
(Acts 18:9,10), and that before conversion; for though none of them
as yet were his children by calling, yet were they his according
to election.

Now the elect being under this eternal grace and mercy, they must
needs be under it both before present justice seizeth upon them,
while it seizeth them, and also continueth with them longer than
present justice can, it being from everlasting to everlasting.
This being so, here is the reason why no sin, nor yet temptation
of the enemy, with any other evil, can hurt or destroy those thus
elect of God: yea this is that which maketh even those things that
in themselves are the very bane of men, yet prove very much for
good to those within this purpose (Rom 8:28). And as David saith,
'It is good for me that I have been afflicted' (Psa 119:71).
And again, 'But when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world' (1 Cor 11:32).
Now afflictions, &c., in themselves are not only fruitless and
unprofitable, but, being unsanctified, are destructive; 'I smote
him, and he went on frowardly' (Isa 57:17). But now eternal mercy
working with this or that affliction, makes it profitable to the
chosen; 'I have seen his ways, and will heal him, and restore
comforts unto him and to his mourners' (v 18). As he saith in another
place, 'Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and teachest him
out of thy law' (Psa 94:12). For eternal mercy doth not look on
those who are the elect and chosen of God, as poor sinful creatures
only, but also as the generation whom the Lord hath blessed,
in whom he hath designed to magnify his mercy to the utmost, by
pardoning the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage (1 Peter
2:9; Micah 7:18,19). 'Having predestinated us unto the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ to himself,--wherein he hath made us
accepted in the beloved' (Eph 1:6). Wherefore, I say, the elect,
as they do also receive that grace and mercy that may be sinned
away, so they have that grace and mercy which cannot be lost,
and that sin cannot deprive them of, even mercy that abounds, and
goeth beyond all sin; such mercy as hath engaged the power of God,
the intercession of Christ, and the communication of the blessed
Spirit of adoption, which Spirit also engageth the heart, directs
it into the love of God, that it may not depart from God after
that rate as the reprobates do (Eph 5:29,30). 'I will make an
everlasting covenant with them, [saith God] that I will not turn
away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me' (Jer 32:40).

But now I say, God's dealing with the non-elect, is far otherwise,
they being under the consideration of eternal justice, even then
when in the enjoyment of present grace and mercy. And hence it
is that as to their standing before the God of heaven, they are
counted dogs, and sows, and devils, even then when before the elect
of God themselves they are counted saints and brethren: 'The dog
is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed
to her wallowing in the mire' (2 Peter 2:22). And the reason is,
because notwithstanding all their shew before the world, their old
nature and corruptions do still bear sway within, which in time
also, according to the ordinary judgment of God, is suffered so
to shew itself, that they are visible to saints that are elect,
as was the case of Simon Magus, and that wicked apostate Judas,
who 'went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they
went out that they might be made manifest that they were not all
of us' (1 John 2:19). They were not elect as we, nor were they
sanctified as the elect of God themselves; wherefore eternal justice
counts them the sons of perdition, when under their profession.
And I say, they being under this eternal justice, it must needs
have to do with them in the midst of their profession; and because
also it is much offended with them for conniving with their lust,
it taketh away from them, and that most righteously, those gifts
and graces, and benefits and privileges that present mercy gave
them; and not only so, but cuts them off for their iniquity, and
layeth them under wrath for ever. They 'have forsaken the right way,
[saith God]--following the way of Baalam the son of Bosor;--these
are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest';
trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked
up by the roots, 'for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness
for ever' (2 Peter 2:5,16,17; Jude 11-13; John 17:12; Matt 13:12,
25:29; Mark 4:25; Luke 8:18).

These things thus considered, you see,

1. That there is present grace and present mercy, eternal grace
and eternal mercy.

2. That the elect are under eternal mercy, and THAT, when under
present justice; and that the reprobate is under eternal justice,
and THAT when under present mercy.

3. Thus you see again, that the non-elect perish by reason of
sin, notwithstanding present mercy, because of eternal justice;
and that the elect are preserved from the death, though they sin
and are obnoxious to the strokes of present justice, by reason of
eternal mercy. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness
with God? God forbid: 'He hath mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and compassion on whom he will have compassion' (Rom 9:15).



FOOTNOTES:

[1] 'Shedding words' means 'scattering or spreading words,' as in
Acts 2:33; now obsolete.--Ed.

[2] As election took place before the creation of man--all men in
Adam were decreed, made and turned into the world upright.--Ed.

[3] 'Prevents our doing good.' Few words in the English language
have more altered in their meaning than 'prevent'; it is derived
from 'praevenio,' to go before. In Bunyan's time, it meant 'to go
before,' 'clear the way,' 'make the way easy' for our doing good.
Its present meaning is 'to obstruct,' by going or standing before
us.--Ed.

[4] They who diligently attend to the scriptures, will find
throughout the whole a vein of election and reprobation. The holy
seed may be traced in many instances, and in divers families, in
the Bible, from Adam to the birth of our Saviour, whose ancestors,
according to the flesh, were of the line of election or the godly;
which those who are only born after the flesh, and not after the
Spirit, namely, the reprobate, have always despised and persecuted,
and will do so to the end of time--Mason and Ryland.

[5] It is of God's mere mercy and grace that any sinners are called
and admitted to the privilege of justification and adoption, upon
God's own terms. The reason why the sinful and unworthy heathen
(of whom Britain is a part) were called to be a people, who were
not a people, while the Jews were left out and cast off for their
obstinate unbelief, was not because the Gentiles were either more
worthy or more willing (for they were all dead in trespasses and
sins), but from God's discriminating grace and mercy.--Mason and
Ryland.

[6] The final condemnation of the wicked does not spring from
God's sovereign will to destroy any of his rational creatures;
this is evident from the many pressing invitations, declarations,
and promises in the word of God: for Jehovah swears by his great
self, that he desires not the death of a sinner. Our Lord assigns
the cause of reprobation in these words, (John 5:40) 'Ye will not
come unto me, that ye might have life'; wherefore Christ, the only
remedy for their cure, being rejected, the sinner is condemned,
and rendered the object of wrath and punishment by the law and
justice of God; because the same word of truth which says, 'Whosoever
will, let him come, and take of the water of life freely,' also
says, 'The soul that sinneth [or lives and dies in sin unpardoned]
shall die.' Thus sin is the object of God's hatred, and not the
man, abstractedly considered. May we therefore each of us have
grace to look to Christ for full and complete salvation, who hath
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, whereby he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified!--Ryland and Mason.

[7] 'Secret things belong to God, but those that are revealed
belong to us.' It is a vain thing for men to cavil at the doctrine
of peculiar election, and to quarrel with God for choosing some,
and passing by others. Their best way would be to assure themselves
of their own election, by using the means, and walking in the ways
of God's appointment, as laid down in the word, and then they will
find that God cannot deny himself, but will make good to them every
promise therein; and thus, by scripture evidence, they will find
that they are elected unto life, and will be thankful and humble.
They will then find that an hearty affectionate trusting in Christ
for all his salvation, as freely promised to us, hath naturally
enough in it to work in our souls a natural bent and inclination
to, and ability for, the practice of all holiness.--Ryland and
Mason.

[8] None are excluded the benefit of the great and precious salvation
procured and finished by the Lord Jesus Christ, but they, who
by perverseness, unbelief, and impenitency, exclude themselves.
Sinners,--miserable, helpless, and hopeless sinners, are the objects
of this salvation: whosoever is enabled to see, in the light of
God's Spirit, their wretched and forlorn state; to feel their want
of Christ as a suitable Saviour, and to repent and forsake their
sins, shall find mercy; for 'God is no respecter of persons' (Acts
10:34).--Ryland and Mason.

[9] As the same sun which softens the wax, hardens the clay, so
it is with the preached gospel, which is to some 'the savour of
death unto death, and to others the savour of life unto life' (2
Cor 2:16). The gospel is ineffectual to any saving purpose respecting
the reprobate; partly through pride, and in not enduring to be
reproved by it; partly through slothfulness, in not coming under
the sound of it; and principally through cursed infidelity, in not
believing the gracious message it brings. Let it be well attended
to, that all who hear the gospel, are obliged to the duty of
believing, as well as to all the duties of the moral law, and that
before they know their particular election; for we cannot have
a certain knowledge of our election to eternal life before we do
believe: it is a thing hidden in the unsearchable counsel of God,
until it be manifest by our effectual calling, and believing on
Christ; therefore we must believe on Christ before we know our
election; or else we shall never know it, and shall never believe.
All joy, peace, comfort, assurances, are communicated to the soul
in the way of believing. May the Lord give and increase saving
faith!--Mason and Ryland.

***

QUESTIONS ABOUT THE NATURE AND PERPETUITY OF THE SEVENTH-DAY SABBATH.

AND PROOF, THAT THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK IS THE TRUE CHRISTIAN
SABBATH.

BY JOHN BUNYAN.

'The Son of man is lord also of the Sabbath day.'

London: Printed for Nath, Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultry,
1685.


EDITOR'S ADVERTISEMENT.

All our inquiries into divine commands are required to be made
personally, solemnly, prayerful. To 'prove all things,' and 'hold
fast' and obey 'that which is good,' is a precept, equally binding
upon the clown, as it is upon the philosopher. Satisfied from our
observations of nature, that there is a God; our next inquiry is
into the revelation of his will: which, when understood, must be
implicitly obeyed, in defiance of any usages of society, and of every
erroneous pre-conceived opinion. In this important investigation,
we shall find, that the commands of God revealed to man, fall
under two classes.

First, Moral and Eternal, being essential to the happiness of all
created intelligences, whether pure or sinful. As, the fear and
love of the Creator, who preserves and bountifully blesses his
creatures; and flowing from this is love to all his creation. He
who wantonly destroys life in order that he may glut a demoniac
propensity with the agonizing death struggle, is a practical
atheist. The Christian will cherish and promote the happiness of
all; he dares only to take away life to preserve life.

Second, Ceremonial or Temporal. Those which have been commanded
by God, for local, family or national observances, and which, when
they have fulfilled their intended object, are removed or suffered
gradually to die away.

The well-being of society requires that a portion of time be set
apart for divine worship. Individuals are commanded to pray without
ceasing. An invaluable custom leads families to unite in morning
and evening prayer; and it is an important question whether the
Creator having sanctified, and rested on, the seventh day, intended
that rest as a pattern to all his rational creatures. If so, the
seventh day must depend upon our being able to fix upon which
day of the week the creation commenced. Again our inquiries will
extend to those injunctions, given to the Jews in the wilderness,
to sanctify certain days to public worship; and whether that law
was intended for all mankind. In either case it is essential that
we ascertain whether those various Sabbaths of weeks--of months
or of years--with the ceremonies to be performed on them, were to
continue to the end of time or for a limited period.

In all these inquiries we are strictly confined to revelation,
for there is no indication in nature, or in any of its laws, of
a day of rest; but on the contrary a state of progression marks
every day alike. Our Lord has taught us that 'the Sabbath was made
for man,' and therefore did not exist among the angels, prior to
the creation of man, as all moral or universal obligations must
have existed; for they are the same from eternity to eternity; and
over this, like other ceremonial or local commands, the Creator
claims dominion. 'The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath.'

Researches into these questions were made in earlier times, and
some curious calculations have appeared to prove, that the work
of creation commenced on the day called Monday, so that what is
now termed the first day of the week, was originally the rest of
God from creation; as it was his rest from the work of redemption,
by rising from the tomb. But the extent of that period called a
day, in creation, has never been defined: and the terms 'work' or
'rest,' as applied to the Deity, are used in condescension to our
finite powers. The controversy upon this subject assumed a more
public and definite form at the Reformation. Sir Thomas More asserted
that the seventh day was superseded by the first, in obedience to
tradition:[1] it forms the first of the five commandments of Holy
Church--'The Sundays hear thou mass.' William Tyndale, in reply,
contends that 'we be lords over the Sabbath'; we may change it
for Monday, or any other day, as we see need, or have two every
week, if one is not enough to teach the people.[2] Calvin preferred a
daily assembling of the church, but if that was impossible, then
at stated intervals: his words are--'Since the Sabbath is abrogate,
I do not so rest upon the number of seven, that I would bind the
church to the bondage thereof; neither will I condemn those churches
that have other solemn days for their meetings.'[3] Luther considers
the observance of the Jewish Sabbath one of the 'weak and beggarly
rudiments.'[4]

The controversy became still more popular in this country, when
James the First and Charles the First put forth the book of sports to
be allowed and encouraged on Sundays. The Puritans called Sunday
'The Sabbath,' and a voluminous contest was carried on as to whether
it ought not rather to be called 'The Lord's day.' In 1628, Mr.
Brabourne, a clergyman of note, kept the Jewish Sabbath, and in
a short time several churches, in England, assembled on that day,
and were called 'seventh day, or Sabbath keepers'--many of them
were Baptists. This led to the controversy in which Bunyan took
his part, in this very conclusive and admirable treatise.

The work was first published in the year 1685, and was not reprinted
until the year 1806, when it appeared in the third volume of select
works by John Bunyan; since then it has been reprinted in two
American editions of his works. The reason why it was not republished,
probably was, that the churches of the Sabbath keepers died away.
At this time only three are known in England; one of these is
at Millyard, London, where my talented antiquarian friend, W. H.
Black, is elder and pastor. These places of worship are supported
by an endowment. Bunyan's book does not appear to have been
answered; indeed, it would require genius of no ordinary kind to
controvert such conclusive evidence.

His arguments are, that the appearances of nature shew no difference
of days--that no Sabbath or other day was set apart for worship
before the giving of the Law at Sinai. 'Thou camest down also upon
Mount Sinai, and madest KNOWN unto them thy holy Sabbaths, by the
hand of Moses' (Neh 9:13,14). 'The seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work--and remember
that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord
thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by
a stretched out arm, THEREFORE the Lord thy God commanded thee to
keep the Sabbath day' (Deut 5:14,15). While many crimes are mentioned
in patriarchal times, there is no complaint of Sabbath-breaking.
We read of fratricide, drunkenness, lying, unbelief, theft, idolatry,
slave-dealing, and other crimes, but no hint as to sanctifying or
desecrating the Sabbath. At length, a few days before the giving
of the law, a natural phenomenon announced to the Jews the great
change that was at hand--the manna fell in double quantity on Friday,
and was not found on Saturday. So new was this that, contrary to
the command, the people went out on the seventh day as on other
days, and were rebuked but not punished for it. But no sooner
is the Sabbath instituted by Moses, than it is broken, and the
Sabbath-breaker is punished with a cruel death. It was instituted
as a peculiar observance to distinguish the Jews from all other
nations--'The Lord hath given YOU the Sabbath' (Exo 16:39). 'The
children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath' (Exo 31:16,17). 'I gave
them [the Israelites who were delivered from Egypt] my Sabbaths
to be a sign between me and them' (Eze 20:12). Ceremonies were
commanded to be performed as the Sabbath worship, which cannot
now be observed (see Lev 24; Numb 28: Neh 13:22; Eze 46:4). The
Jewish Sabbath was 'a shadow of things to come, but the body is
of Christ' (Col 2:16,17). The shadows have fled away; we possess
the substance. The covenant of Moses was written on stone--the
new covenant is written on our hearts (Heb 8:9,10). Bunyan admits
no uncertainty as to a fixed day for christian worship: the law
of nature requires it; the God of nature fixes the day, without
borrowing it from the ministration of death. The Jewish passover
and Sabbaths are superseded; Christ our passover is slain, and we
have not an annual but a perpetual feast. We have an infinitely
greater deliverance to commemorate than that of the Jews from
Egypt. Released from the dominion and punishment of sin, we have
entered into a rest boundless as eternity. Manna, which never
fell on the Jewish Sabbath, falls in peculiar and rich abundance
on the first day of the week, when it first began to fall. The
first day is peculiarly sanctified and honoured of God. On this
day the Son rested from His work of redemption (Heb 4:10). He is
Lord of the Sabbath, and hath peculiarly blessed his own day.
On this day some of the saints that slept arose (Matt 27:52,53).
On this day Christ was made the head of the corner, and we will
rejoice and be glad in it. On the first day God begat his beloved
Son from the dead (Acts 13:33). Let all the angels of God worship
him (Heb 1:6). Hence it is called the Lord's day (Rev 1:10).
This day is the only one named upon which Christ appeared to his
disciples after his resurrection: it was on the evening of the
first day of the week, and on the evening of the following eighth
day, that they assembled and Christ appeared in the midst of them.
On this day he walked with his disciples to Emmaus, and made their
hearts to burn within them with holy joy and wonder. The marvels
of the day of Pentecost honoured the first day of the week. On
this day the first great conversion of 'about three thousand souls'
took place. On this day the disciples at Jerusalem came together
to break bread (Acts 20:7). Upon THE, not A, first day they broke
bread; and upon THE first day, the collections were made for the
poor saints (1 Cor 16:1,2). With such concurrent and ample testimony
we must conclude that the seventh day Sabbath, with its Jewish
ritual, is dissolved, and the first day has taken its place. The
Saviour said, 'It is finished'; and from that moment to the end
of the inspired volume, the seventh day is swallowed up in the
glories of the first day of the week. Let Jews commemorate their
temporal deliverance from Pharaoh and Egypt with their divers
ceremonies; but Christians, blessed with a foretaste of eternal
glory, will commemorate the resurrection of their Lord, as the
first fruits of an unspeakable rest from the dominion of sin, of
Satan, and of hell. Our glorified Redeemer sanctioned and blessed
the first day, with his personal appearance in the assemblies of
his saints. His inspired apostles kept it, as it is recorded, and
thus it is sanctioned by the Holy Ghost; and their descendants
are bound to keep it to the end of the world. Go, little treatise,
and carry conviction with thee. Emancipate the christian mind from
all the beggarly rudiments of Jewish rites and ceremonies. Add
to the holy enjoyments of God's saints in public worship, on the
day when their eternal redemption is commemorated by the triumphant
resurrection of their Lord.--GEO. OFFOR.


TO THE READER.

Some may think it strange, since God's church has already been
so well furnished with sound grounds and reasons by so many wise
and godly men, for proof that the first day of the week is our
true Christian sabbath, that I should now offer this small treatise
upon the same account. But when the scales are even by what already
is put in, a little more, you know, makes the weight the better.

Or grant we had down weight before, yet something over and above
may make his work the harder, that shall by hanging fictions on
the other end, endeavour to make things seem too light.

Besides, this book being little, may best suit such as have but
shallow purses, short memories, and but little time to spare,
which usually is the lot of the mean and poorer sort of men.

I have also written upon this subject, for that I would, as in
other gospel truths, be a fellow witness with good men that the
day in which our Lord rose from the dead should be much set by of
Christians.

I have observed that some, otherwise sound in faith, are apt to
be entangled with a Jewish sabbath, &c., and that some also that
are afar off from the observation of that, have but little to
say for their own practice, though good; and might I help them I
should be glad.

A Jewish seventh-day sabbath has no promise of grace belonging
to it, if that be true, as to be sure it is, where Paul says, The
command to honour parents is the first commandment with promise
(Eph 6:1-3).

Also it follows from hence, that the sabbath that has a promise
annexed to the keeping of it, is rather that which the Lord Jesus
shall give to the churches of the Gentiles (Isa 56).

Perhaps my method here may not in all things keep the common path
of argumentation with them that have gone before me: but I trust
[that] the godly wise will find a taste of scripture truth in what
I present them with as to the sanction of our Christian sabbath.

I have here, by handling four questions, proved, that the seventh
day sabbath was not moral. For that must of necessity be done,
before it can be made appear that the first day of the week is that
which is the sabbath day for Christians. But withal it follows,
that if the seventh day sabbath was not moral,[5] the first day is
not so. What is it then? Why, a sabbath for holy worship is moral;
but this or that day appointed for such service, is sanctified by
precept or by approved example. The timing then of a sabbath for
us lies in God, not man; in grace, not nature; nor in the ministration
of death, written and engraven in stones: God always reserving to
himself a power to alter and change both time and modes of worship
according to his own will.

A sabbath then, or day of rest from worldly affairs to solemnize
worship to God in, all good men do by nature conclude is meet;
yea, necessary: yet that, not nature, but God reveals.

Nor is that day or time by God so fixed on, in its own nature,
better than any other: the holiness then of a sabbath lies, not
in the nature or place of a day, but in the ordinance of God.

Nor doth our sanctifying of it, to the ends for which it is
ordained, lie in a bare confession that it is such; but in a holy
performance of the duty of the day to God by Christ, according to
his word.

But I will not enlarge to detain the reader longer from the
following sheets; but shall commit both him and them to the wise
dispose of God, and rest,

Thine to serve thee,

JOH. BUNYAN.



QUESTIONS ABOUT THE NATURE AND PERPETUITY OF THE SEVENTH-DAY
SABBATH.


QUESTION I.

Whether the seventh day sabbath is of, or made known to, man by
the law and light of nature?

Something must be here premised before I show the grounds of this
question. First then, by the law or light of nature, I mean that
law which was concreate with man; that which is natural to him,
being original with, and essential to, himself; consequently, that
which is invariable and unalterable, as is that nature. Secondly,
I grant that by this law of nature, man understands that there
is one eternal God; that this God is to be worshiped according to
his own will; consequently, that time must be allowed to do it
in: but whether the law or light of nature teacheth, and that of
itself, without the help of revelation, that the seventh day of
the week is that time sanctified of God, and set apart for his
worship, that is the question; and the grounds of it are these:

First, Because the law of nature is antecedent to this day, yea
completed as a law before it was known or revealed to man, that
God either did or would sanctify the seventh day of the week at
all.

Now this law, as was said, being natural to a man, for man is a
law unto himself (Rom 2), could only teach the things of a man,
and there the Apostle stints it (1 Cor 2:11). But to be able
to determine, and that about things that were yet without being,
either in nature or by revelation, is that which belongs not to a
man as a man; and the seventh day sabbath, as yet, was such. For
Adam was completely made the day before; and God did not sanctify
the seventh day before it was, none otherwise than by his secret
decree. Therefore, by the law of nature, Adam understood it not,
it was not made known to him thereby.

Second, To affirm the contrary, is to make the law of nature
supernatural, which is an impossibility. Yea, they that do so make
it a predictor, a prophet; a prophet about divine things to come;
yea, a prophet able to foretell what shall be, and that without
a revelation; which is a strain that never yet prophet pretended
to.

Besides, to grant this, is to run into a grievous error; for
this doth not only make the law of nature the first of prophets,
contrary to Genesis 3:10 compared with John 1:1 but it seems to
make the will of God, made known by revelation, a needless thing.
For if the law of nature, as such, can predict, or foretell God's
secrets, and that before he reveals them, and this law of nature
is universal in every individual man in the world, what need is
there of particular prophets, or of their holy writings? And indeed
here the Quakers and others split themselves. For if the law of
nature can of itself reveal unto me one thing pertaining to
instituted worship, for that we are treating of now, and the
exact time which God has not yet sanctified and set apart for the
performance thereof, why may it not reveal unto me more, and so
still more; and at last all that is requisite for me to know, both
as to my salvation, and how God is to be worshiped in the church
on earth.

Third, If it be of the law of nature, then all men by nature are
convinced of the necessity of keeping it, and that though they
never read or heard of the revealed will of God about it; but this
we find not in the world.

For though it is true that the law of nature is common to all, and
that all men are to this day under the power and command thereof;
yet we find not that they are by nature under the conviction of the
necessity of keeping of a seventh day sabbath. Yea, the Gentiles,
though we read not that they ever despised the law of nature,
yet never had, as such, a reverence of a seventh day sabbath, but
rather the contrary.

Fourth, If therefore the seventh day sabbath is not of the law
of nature, then it should seem not to be obligatory to all. For
instituted worship, and the necessary circumstances thereunto
belonging, is obligatory but to some. The tree that Adam was forbid
to eat of, we read not but that his children might have eat the
fruit thereof: and circumcision, the passover, and other parts of
instituted worship was enjoined but to some.

Fifth, I doubt the seventh day sabbath is not of the law of nature,
and so not moral; because though we read that the law of nature,
and that before Moses, was charged upon the world, yet I find
not till then, that the profanation of a seventh day sabbath was
charged upon the world: and indeed to me this very thing makes a
great scruple in the case.

A law, as I said, we read of, and that from Adam to Moses (Rom
5:13,14). The transgressions also of that law, we read of them,
and that particularly, as in Genesis 4:8, 6:5, 9:21, 22, 12:13,
13:13, 18:12-15, 19:5; (Eze 16:49,50[6]); Genesis 31:30, 35:2,
40:15, 44:8-10; Deuteronomy 8:19, 20, 12:2; Psalm 106:35-37 and
Romans the first and second chapters.

But in all the scriptures we do not read, that the breach of a
seventh day sabbath was charged upon men as men all that time.
Whence I gather, that either a seventh day sabbath was not discerned
by the light of nature, and so not by that law imposed; or else,
that men by the help and assistance of that, for we speak of men
as men,[7] in old time kept it better, than in after ages did the
church of God with better assistance by far. For they are there
yet found fault with as breakers of the sabbath (Eze 20:13).

It follows therefore, that if the law of nature doth not of itself
reveal to us, as men, that the seventh day is the holy sabbath of
God. That that day, as to the sanction of it, is not moral, but
rather arbitrary, to wit, imposed by the will of God upon his
people, until the time he thought fit to change it for another
day.

And if so, it is hence to be concluded, that though by the light
of nature men might see that time must be allowed and set apart
for the performance of that worship that God would set up in his
house, yet, as such, it could not see what time the Lord would to
that end choose. Nature therefore saw that, by a positive precept,
or a word revealing it, and by no other means.

Nor doth this at all take away a whit of that sanction which God
once put upon the seventh day sabbath; unless any will say, and
by sufficient argument prove, that an ordinance for divine worship
receiveth greater sanction from the law of nature than from a
divine precept: or standeth stronger when it is established by a
law humane, for such is the law of nature, than when imposed by
revelation of God.

But the text will put this controversy to an end. The sanction of
the seventh day sabbath, even as it was the rest of God, was not
till after the law of nature was completed; God rested the seventh
day and sanctified it (Gen 2:3). Sanctified it; that is, set it
apart to the end there mentioned, to wit, to rest thereon.

Other grounds of this question I might produce, but at present I
will stop here, and conclude, That if a seventh day sabbath was an
essential necessary to the instituted worship of God, then itself
also as to its sanction for that work, was not founded but by a
positive precept; consequently not known of man at first, but by
revelation of God.


QUESTION II.

Whether the seventh day sabbath, as to man's keeping of it holy,
was ever made known to, or imposed by, a positive precept upon him
until the time of Moses? which from Adam was about two thousand
years.

Something must also be here premised, in order to my propounding
of my grounds for this question; and that is, That the seventh
day was sanctified so soon as it had being in the world, unto the
rest of God, as it is Genesis 2:2, 3 and he did rest, from all
his works which he had made therein. But the question is, Whether
when God did thus sanctify this day to his own rest, he did also
by the space of time above-mentioned, impose it as an holy sabbath
of rest upon men; to the end they might solemnize worship to him
in special manner thereon? And I question this,

First, Because we read not that it was. And reading, I mean, of
the divine testimony, is ordained of God, for us to find out the
mind of God, both as to faith and our performance of acceptable
service to him.

In reading also, we are to have regard to two things.

I. To see if we can find a precept: or,

II. A countenanced practice for what we do. For both these ways
we are to search, that we may find out what is that good, that
acceptable will of God.

For the first of these we have Genesis 2:16, 17 and for the second,
Genesis 8:20, 21 [as to public worship but not on a stated day].

Now as to the imposing of a seventh day sabbath upon men from
Adam to Moses, of that we find nothing in holy writ either from
precept or example. True, we find that solemn worship was performed
by the saints that then lived: for both Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, sacrificed unto God (Gen 4:4, 8:20,21, 12:7, 13:4, 35:1),
but we read not that the seventh day was the time prefixed of
God for their so worshipping, or that they took any notice of it.
Some say, that Adam in eating the forbidden fruit, brake also the
seventh day sabbath, because he fell on that day;[8] but we read
not that the breach of a sabbath was charged upon him. That which
we read is this; 'Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded
thee that thou shouldest not eat?' (Gen 3:11). Some say also that
Cain killed Abel on a sabbath day;[9] but we read not that, in
his charge, God laid any such thing at his door. This was it of
which he stood guilty before God; namely, That his brother's blood
cried unto God against him from the ground (Gen 4:10).

I therefore take little notice of what a man saith, though he
flourisheth his matter with many brave words, if he bring not with
him, 'Thus saith the Lord.' For that, and that only, ought to be
my ground of faith as to how my God would be worshiped by me. For
in the matters material to the worship of God, it is safest that
thus I be guided in my judgment: for here only I perceive 'the
footsteps of the flock' (Cant 1:8; Eze 3:11). They say further,
that for God to sanctify a thing, is to set it apart. This being
true; then it follows, that the seventh day sabbath was sanctified,
that is, set apart for Adam in paradise; and so, that it was
ordained a sabbath of rest to the saints from the beginning.

But I answer, as I hinted before, that God did sanctify it to his
own rest. 'The LORD [also] hath set apart him that is godly for
himself.' But again, it is one thing for God to sanctify this or
that thing to an use, and another thing to command that that thing
be forthwith in being to us. As for instance: the land of Canaan
was set apart many years for the children of Israel before they
possessed that land. Christ Jesus was long sanctified; that is,
set apart to be our redeemer before he sent him into the world
(Deut 32:8; John 10:36).

If then, by God's sanctifying of the seventh day for a sabbath,
you understand it for a sabbath for man, (but the text saith not
so) yet it might be so set apart for man, long before it should
be, as such, made known unto him. And that the seventh day sabbath
was not as yet made known to men.

Second, Consider secondly, Moses himself seems to have the knowledge
of it at first, not by tradition, but by revelation; as it is
Exodus 16:23, 'This is that [saith he] which the Lord hath said,
[namely to me; for we read not, as yet, that he said it to any body
else]. To morrow is the sabbath of the holy rest unto the Lord.'

Also holy Nehemiah suggesteth this, when he saith of Israel to
God, Thou 'madest known unto them thy holy sabbath [by the hand
of Moses thy servant]' (Neh 9:14). The first of these texts shews
us, that tidings of a seventh day sabbath for men, came first to
Moses from heaven: and the second, that it was to Israel before
unknown.

But how could be either the one or the other, if the seventh day
sabbath was taught to men by the light of nature, which is the moral
law? Or if from the beginning it was given to men by a positive
precept for to be kept.

This therefore strengtheneth my doubt about the affirmative of the
first question, and also prepareth an argument for what I plead
as to this we have now under consideration.

Third, This yet seems to me more scrupulous, because that the
punishment due to the breach of the seventh day sabbath was hid
from men to the time of Moses; as is clear, for that it is said
of the breaker of the sabbath, 'They put him in ward, because it
was not [as yet] declared what should be done to him' (Num 15:32-36).

But methinks, had this seventh day sabbath been imposed upon men
from the beginning, the penalty or punishment due to the breach
thereof had certainly been known before now.

When Adam was forbidden to eat of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, the penalty was then, if he disobeyed, annexed to
the prohibition. So also it was as to circumcision, the passover,
and other ordinances for worship. How then can it be thought,
that the seventh day sabbath should be imposed upon men from the
beginning; and that the punishment for the breach thereof, should
be hid with God for the space of two thousand years! (Gen 2:16,17,
17:13,14; Exo 12:43-48) and the same chapter (v 19).

Fourth, God's giving of the seventh day sabbath was with respect
to stated and stinted worship in his church; the which, until the
time of Moses, was not set up among his people. Things till then
were adding or growing: now a sacrifice, then circumcision, then
again long after that the passover, &c.

But when Israel was come into the wilderness, there to receive
as God's congregation, a stated, stinted, limited way of worship,
then he appoints them a time, and times, to perform this worship
in; but as I said afore, before that it was not so, as the whole
five books of Moses plainly shew: wherefore the seventh day
sabbath, as such a limited day cannot be moral, or of the law of
nature, nor imposed till then.

And methinks Christ Jesus and his apostles do plainly enough declare
this very thing. For that when they repeat unto the people, or
expound before them the moral law, they quite exclude the seventh
day sabbath. Yea, Paul makes that law to us complete without it.

We will first touch upon what Christ doth in this case.

As in his sermon upon the mount (Matt 5-7). In all that large and
heavenly discourse upon this law, you have not one syllable about
the seventh day sabbath.

So when the young man came running, and kneeling, and asking what
good thing he should do to inherit eternal life, Christ bids him
keep the commandments; but when the young man asked which; Christ
quite leaves out the seventh day, and puts him upon the other. As
in Matthew 19:16-19. As in Mark 10:17-20. As in Luke 18:18-20.

You will say, he left out the first, and second, and third likewise.
To which I say, that was because the young man by his question
did presuppose that he had been a doer of them: for he professed
in his supplication, that he was a lover of that which is naturally
good, which is God, in that his petition was so universal for
every thing which he had commanded.

Paul also when he makes mention of the moral law, quite leaves out
of that the very name of the seventh day sabbath, and professeth,
that to us Christians the law of nature is complete without it.
As in Romans 3:7-19. As in Romans 13:7-10. As in 1 Timothy 1:8-11.

'He that loveth another, saith he, hath fulfiled the law. For
this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou
shalt not steal, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other
commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Love worketh no ill to his
neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.'

I make not an argument of this, but take an occasion to mention
it as I go. But certainly, had the seventh day sabbath been moral,
or of the law of nature, as some would fain persuade themselves,
it would not so slenderly have been passed over in all these
repetitions of this law, but would by Christ or his apostles have
been pressed upon the people, when so fair an opportunity as at
these times offered itself unto them. But they knew what they did,
and wherefore they were so silent as to the mention of a seventh
day sabbath when they so well talked of the law as moral.

Fifth, Moses and the prophet Ezekiel both, do fully confirm what
has been insinuated by us; to wit, that the seventh day, as a
sabbath, was not imposed upon men until Israel was brought into
the wilderness.

1. Moses saith to Israel, 'Remember that thou wast a servant int
he land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence
through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: THEREFORE the
Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.' Yea, he
tells us, that the covenant which God made with them in Horeb,
that written in stones, was not made with their forefathers, to
wit, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but with them (Deut 5:1-15).

2. Ezekiel also is punctual as to this: I caused them, saith God
by that prophet, 'to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought
them into the wilderness. And I gave them my statutes, and shewed
them my judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in them.
Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me
and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify
them' (Eze 20:10-12; Exo 20:8, 31:13, 35:2).

What can be more plain? And these to be sure, are two notable
witnesses of God, who, as you see, do jointly concur in this; to
wit, That it was not from paradise, nor from the fathers, but from
the wilderness, and from Sinai, that men received the seventh day
sabbath to keep it holy.

True, it was God's sabbath before: for on the first seventh day we
read, that God rested thereon, and sanctified it. Hence he calls
it in the first place, MY sabbath. I gave them my sabbath: But
it seems it was not given to the church till he had brought them
into the wilderness.

But I say, if it had been moral, it had been natural to man; and
by the light of nature men would have understood it, even both
before it was, and otherwise. But of this you see we read nothing,
either by positive law, or countenanced example, or any other way,
but rather the flat contrary; to wit, that Moses had the knowledge
of it first from heaven, not by tradition. That Israel had it,
not of, or from their fathers, but in the wilderness, from him, to
wit, Moses, after he had brought them out of the land of Egypt. And
that that whole law in which this seventh day sabbath is placed,
was given for the bounding and better ordering of them in their
church state for their time, till the Messias should come and
put, by a better ministration, this out of his church, as we shall
further shew anon.

The seventh day sabbath therefore was not from paradise, nor from
nature, nor from the fathers, but from t he wilderness, and from
Sinai.


QUESTION III.

Whether when the seventh day sabbath was given to Israel in the
wilderness the Gentiles, as such, was concerned therein.

Before I shew my ground for this question, I must also first premise,
That the Gentiles, as such, were then without the church of God,
and pale thereof; consequently had nothing to do with the essentials
or necessary circumstances of that worship which God had set up
for himself now among the children of Israel.

Now then for the ground of the question.

First, we read not that God gave it to any but to the seed of
Jacob. Hence it is said to Israel, and to Israel only, 'The Lord
hath given YOU the sabbath' (Exo 16:29). And again, 'also I gave
THEM my sabbath' (Eze 20:5,12).

Now, if the gift of the seventh day sabbath was only to Israel,
as these texts do more than seem to say; then to the Gentiles, as
such, it was not given. Unless any shall conclude, that God by
thus doing preferred the Jew to a state of gentileism; or that
he bestowed on them, by thus doing, some high Gentile privilege.
But this would be very fictious. For, to lay aside reason, the text
always, as to preference, did set the Jew in the first of places
(Rom 2:10). Nor was his giving the seventh day sabbath to them
but a sign and token thereof.

But the great objection is, because the seventh day sabbath
is found amongst the rest of those precepts which is so commonly
called the moral law; for thence it is concluded to be of a
perpetual duration.

But I answer: That neither that as given on Sinai is moral; I
mean, as to the manner and ends of its ministration, of which,
God permitting, we shall say more in our answer to the fourth
question, whither I direct you for satisfaction. But,

Second, The Gentiles could not be concerned, as such, with God's
giving of a seventh day sabbath to Israel, because, as I have
shewed before, it was given to Israel, considered as a church of
God (Acts 7:32). Nor was it given to them, as such, but with rites
and ceremonies thereto belonging, so Leviticus 24:5-9; Numbers
28:9, 10; Nehemiah 13:22; Ezekiel 46:4.

Now, I say, if this sabbath hath ceremonies thereto belonging,
and if these ceremonies were essential to the right keeping of
the sabbath: and again, if these ceremonies were given to Israel
only, excluding all but such as were their proselytes, then this
sabbath was given to them as excluding the Gentiles as such. But if
it had been moral, the Gentiles could as soon have been deprived
of their nature as of a seventh day sabbath, though the Jews should
have appropriated it unto themselves only.

Again, to say that God gave this seventh day sabbath to the Gentiles,
as such, (and yet so he must, if it be of the moral law) is as
much as to say, that God hath ordained that that sabbath should
be kept by the Gentiles without; but by the Jews, not without her
ceremonies. And what conclusion will follow from hence, but that
God did at one and the same time set up two sorts of acceptable
worships in the world: one among the Jews, another among the Gentiles!
But how ridiculous such a thought would be, and how repugnant to
the wisdom of God, you may easily perceive.

Yea, what a diminution would this be to God's church that then was,
for one to say, the Gentiles were to serve God with more liberty
than the Jew! For the law was a yoke, and yet the Gentile is called
the dog, and said to be without God in the world (Deut 7:7; Psa
147:19,20; Matt 15:26; Eph 2:11,12).

Third, When the Gentiles, at the Jews' return from Babylon, came
and offered their wares to sell to the children of Israel at
Jerusalem on this sabbath; yea, and sold them to them too: yet
not they, but the Jews were rebuked as the only breakers of that
sabbath. Nay, there dwelt then at Jerusalem men of Tyre, that on
this sabbath sold their commodities to the Jews, and men of Judah:
yet not they, but the men of Judah, were contended with, as the
breakers of this sabbath.

True, good Nehemiah did threaten the Gentiles that were merchants,
for lying then about the walls of the city, for that by that means
they were a temptation to the Jews to break their sabbaths; but
still he charged the breach thereof only upon his own people (Neh
13:15-20).

But can it be imagined, had the Gentiles now been concerned with
this sabbath by law divine, that so holy a man as Nehemiah would have
let them escape without a rebuke for so notorious a transgression
thereof; especially considering, that now also they were upon
God's ground, to wit, within and without the walls of Jerusalem.

Fourth, Wherefore he saith to Israel again, 'Verily my sabbaths
YE shall keep.' And again, 'YE shall keep the sabbath.' And again,
'The children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the
sabbath throughout THEIR generations' (Exo 31:14-16, 16:29).[10]

What can be more plain, these things thus standing int he testament
of God, than that the seventh day sabbath, as such, was given to
Israel, to Israel ONLY; and that the Gentiles, as such, were not
concerned therein!

Fifth, The very reason also of God's giving of the seventh day
sabbath to the Jews, doth exclude the Gentiles, as such, from having
any concern therein. For it was given to the Jews, as was said
before, as they were considered God's church, and for a sign and
token by which they should know that he had chosen and sanctified
them to himself for a peculiar people (Exo 31:13-17; Eze 20:12,13).

And a great token and sign it was that he had so chosen them: for
in that he had given to them this sabbath, he had given to them
(his own rest) a figure and pledge of his sending his Son into the
world to redeem them from the bondage and slavery of the devil:
of which indeed this sabbath was a shadow or type (Col 2:16,17).[11]

Thus have I concluded my ground for this third question. I shall
therefore now propound another.


QUESTION IV.

Whether the seventh day sabbath did not fall, as such, with the
rest of the Jewish rites and ceremonies? Or whether that day, as
a sabbath, was afterwards by the apostles imposed upon the churches
of the Gentiles?

I would now also, before I shew the grounds of my proposing this
question, premise what is necessary thereunto; to wit, That time
and day were both fixed upon by law, for the solemn performance
of divine worship among the Jews; and that time and day is also
by law fixed, for the solemnizing of divine worship to God in the
churches of the Gentiles. But that the seventh day sabbath, as
such, is that time, that day, that still I question.

Now before I shew the grounds of my questioning of it, I shall
enquire into the nature of that ministration in the bowels of
which this seventh day sabbath is placed. And,

First, I say, as to that, the nature of that law is moral, but the
ministration, and circumstances thereunto belonging, are shadowish
and figurative.

By the nature of it, I mean the matter thereof: by the ministration
and circumstances thereto belonging, I do mean the giving of it
by such hands, at such a place and time, in such a mode, as when
it was given to Israel in the wilderness.

The matter therefore, to wit, 'Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind,
and with all thy strength': and 'thy neighbour as thyself,' is
everlasting (Mark 12:29-31), and is not from Sinai, nor from the
two tables of stone, but in nature; for this law commenced and
took being and place that day in which man was created. Yea, it
was concreate with him, and without it he cannot be a rational
creature, as he was in the day in which God created him. But for
the ministration of it from Sinai, with the circumstances belonging
to that ministration, they are not moral, nor everlasting, but
shadowish and figurative only.

That ministration cannot be moral for three reasons. 1. It commenced
not when morality commenced, but two thousand years after. 2.
It was not universal as the law, as moral, is; it was given only
to the church of the Jews in those tables. 3. Its end is past
as such a ministration, though the same law as to the morality
thereof abides. Where are the tables of stone and this law as
therein contained? We only, as to that, have the notice of such a
ministration, and a rehearsal of the law, with that mode of giving
of it, in the testament of God.

But to come to particulars.

1. The very preface to that ministration carrieth in it a type
of our deliverance from the bondage of sin, the devil, and hell.
Pharaoh, and Egypt; and Israel's bondage there, being a type of
these.

2. The very stones in which this law was engraven, was a figure
of the tables of the heart. The first two were a figure of the
heart carnal, by which the law was broken: the last two, of the
heart spiritual, in which the new law, the law of grace is written
and preserved (Exo 34:1; 2 Cor 3:3).

3. The very mount on which this ministration was given, was typical
of Mount Zion. See Hebrews 12 where they are compared (vv 18-22).

4. Yea, the very church to whom that ministration was given, was
a figure of the church of the gospel that is on Mount Zion. See the
same scripture, and compare it with Acts 7:38; Revelation 14:1-5.

5. That ministration was given in the hand and by the disposition
of angels, to prefigure how the new law or ministration of the
Spirit was to be given afterwards to the churches under the New
Testament by the hands of the angel of God's everlasting covenant
of grace, who is his only begotten Son (Isa 63:9; Mal 3:1[12];
Acts 3:22,23).

6. It was given to Israel also in the hand of Moses, as mediator,
to shew, or typify out, that the law of grace was in after times
to come to the church of Christ by the hand and mediation of Jesus
our Lord (Gal 3:19; Deut 5:5; Heb 8:6; 1 Tim 2:5; Heb 9:15, 12:24).

7. As to this ministration, it was to continue but 'till the seed
should come'; and then must, as such, give place to a better
ministration (Gal 3:19). 'A better covenant, established upon
better promises' (Heb 8:6).

From all this therefore I conclude, that there is a difference to
be put between the morality of the law, and the ministration of
it upon Sinai. The law, as to its morality was before; but as to
this ministration, it was not till the church was with Moses, and
he with the angels on Mount Sinai in the wilderness.

Now in the law, as moral, we conclude a time propounded, but no
seventh day sabbath enjoined. But in that law, as thus ministered,
which ministration is already out of doors;[13] we find a seventh
day; that seventh day on which God rested, on which God rested
from all his works, enjoined. What is it then? Why the whole
ministration as written and engraven in stones being removed,
the seventh day sabbath must also be removed; for that the time
nor yet the day, was as to our holy sabbath, or rest, moral; but
imposed with that whole ministration, as such, upon the church,
until the time of reformation: which time being come, this
ministration, as I said, as such, ceaseth; and the whole law,
as to the morality of it, is delivered into the hand of Christ,
who imposes it now also; but not as a law of works, nor as that
ministration written and engrave in stones, but as a rule of life
to those that have believed in him (1 Cor 9:21).

So then, that law is still moral, and still supposes, since it
teaches that there is a God, that time must be set apart for his
church to worship him in, according to that will of his that he
had revealed in his word. But though by that law time is required;
yet by that, as moral, the time never was prefixed.

The time then of old was appointed by such a ministration of that
law as we have been now discoursing of; and when that ministration
ceaseth, that time did also vanish with it. And now by our new
law-giver, the Son of God, he being 'lord also of the sabbath
day,' we have a time prefixed, as the law of nature requireth, a
new day, by him who is the lord of it; I say, appointed, wherein
we may worship, not in the oldness of that letter written and
engraven in stones, but according to, and most agreeing with,
his new and holy testament. And this I confirm further by those
reasons that now shall follow.

First, Because we find not from the resurrection of Christ to
the end of the Bible, anything written by which is imposed that
seventh day sabbath upon the churches. Time, as I said, the law
as moral requires; but that time we find no longer imposed. And in
all duties pertaining to God and his true worship in his churches,
we must be guided by his laws and testaments. By his old laws,
when his old worship was in force; and by his new laws, when his
new worship is in force. And he hath verily now said, 'Behold, I
make all things new' (Rev 21:5).

Second, I find, as I have shewed, that this seventh day sabbath is
confined, not to the law of nature as such, but to that ministration
of it which was given on Sinai: which ministration as it is come
to an end as such, so it is rejected by Paul as a ministration no
ways capable of abiding in the church now, since the ministration
of the Spirit also hath taken its place (2 Cor 3). Wherefore
instead of propounding it to the churches with arguments tending
to its reception, he seeks by degrading it of its old lustre and
glory, to wean the churches from any likement[14] thereof:

1. By calling of it the ministration of death, of the letter, and
of condemnation, a term most frightful, but no ways alluring to
the godly.

2. By calling it a ministration that now has no glory, by reason
of the exceeding glory of that ministration under which by the
Holy Spirit the New Testament churches are. And these are weaning
considerations (2 Cor 3).

3. By telling of them it is a ministration that tendeth to blind
the mind, and to veil the heart as to the knowledge of their Christ:
so that they cannot, while under that, behold his beauteous face,
but as their heart shall turn from it to him (2 Cor 3).

4. And that they might not be left in the dark, but perfectly know
what ministration it is that he means, he saith expressly, it is
that 'written and engraven in stones.' See again 2 Corinthians 3.
And in that ministration it is that this seventh day sabbath is
found.

But shall we think that the apostle speaks any thing of all here
said, to wean saints off from the law of nature, as such! No
verily, that he retains in the church, as being managed there by
Christ: but THIS ministration is dangerous now, because it cannot
be maintained in the church, but in a way of contempt to the
ministration of the Spirit, and is derogatory to the glory of
that.

Now these, as I said, are weaning considerations. No man, I do
think, that knows himself, or the glory of a gospel ministration,
can, if he understands what Paul says here, desire that such a
ministration should be retained in the churches.

Third. This seventh day sabbath has lost its ceremonies (those
unto which before you are cited by the texts) which was with it
imposed upon the old church for her due performance of worship to
God thereon. How then can this sabbath now be kept? Kept, I say,
according to law. For if the church on which it was first imposed,
was not to keep it, yea, could not keep it legally without the
practising of those ceremonies: and if those ceremonies are long
ago dead and gone, how will those that pretend to a belief of a
continuation of the sanction thereof, keep it, I say, according
as it is written?

If they say, they retain the day, but change their manner of
observation thereof; I ask, who has commanded them so to do? This
is one of the laws of this sabbath. 'Thou shalt take fine flour,
and bake twelve cakes thereof: two tenth deals shall be in one
cake. And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the
pure table before the Lord. And thou shalt put pure frankincense
upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even
an offering made by fire unto the Lord. Every sabbath he shall
set it in order before the Lord continually, being taken from the
children of Israel by an everlasting covenant' (Lev 24:5-8). You
may see also other places, as Numbers 28:9, 10; Nehemiah 13:22
and Ezekiel 46:4.

Now if these be the laws of the sabbath, this seventh day sabbath;
and if God did never command that this sabbath should by his
church be sanctified without them: and, as was said before, if
these ceremonies have been long since dead and buried, how must
this sabbath be kept?

Let men take heed, lest while they plead for law, and pretend
themselves to be the only doers of God's will,[15] they be not
found the biggest transgressors thereof. And why can they not as
well keep the other sabbaths? As the sabbath of months, of years,
and the jubilee? For this, as I have shewed, is no moral precept,
it is only a branch of the ministration of death and condemnation.

Fourth, The seventh day sabbath, as such, was a sign and shadow
of things to come; and a sign cannot be the thing signified and
substance too. Wherefore when the thing signified or substance,
is come, the sign or thing shadowing ceaseth. And, I say, the
seventh day sabbath being so, as a seventh day sabbath it ceaseth
also. See again Exodus 31:13, 14; Ezekiel 20:12, 21; Colossians
2:14.

Nor do I find that our Protestant writers, notwithstanding their
reverence of the sabbath, do conclude otherwise; but that though
time as to worshipping God, must needs be contained in the bowels
of the moral law, as moral; yet they for good reasons forbear to
affix the seventh day as that time there too.

They do it, I say, for good reasons; reason drawn from the scripture;
or rather, for that the scripture draws them so to conclude: yet
they cast not away the morality of a sabbath of rest to the church.
It is to be granted them, that time for God's worship abideth for
ever, but the seventh day vanishes as a shadow and sign; because
such indeed it was, as the scripture above cited declares as to
the sanction thereof as a sabbath.

The law of nature then calls for time; but the God of nature
assigns it, and has given power to his Son to continue SUCH time
as himself shall by his eternal wisdom judge most meet for the
churches of the Gentiles to solemnize worship to God by him in.
Hence he is said to be 'Lord even of the sabbath day' (Matt 12:8).

Fifth, I find by reading God's word, that Paul by authority
apostolical, takes away the sanctions of all the Jews' festivals
and sabbaths.

This is manifest, for that he leaves the observation or non-observation
of them, as things indifferent, to the mind and discretion of
the believers. 'One man esteemeth one day above another: another
esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in
his own mind' (Rev 14:5).

By this last clause of the verse, 'Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own mind,' he doth plainly declare, that such days are
now stript of their sanction.[16] For none of God's laws, while
they retain their sanction, are left to the will and mind of the
believers, as to whether they will observe them or no. Men, I say,
are not left to their liberty in such a case; for when a stamp of
divine authority is upon a law, and abides, so long we are bound,
not to our mind, but to that law: but when a thing, once sacred,
has lost its sanction, then it falls, as to faith and conscience,
among other common or indifferent things. And so the seventh day
sabbath did. Again,

Sixth, Thus Paul writes to the church of Colosse. 'Let no man
therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an
holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath: which are a shadow
of things to come; but the body is of Christ' (Col 2:16,17). Here
also, as he serveth other holy days, he serveth the sabbath. He
gives a liberty to believers to refuse the observation of it, and
commands that no man should judge against them for their so doing.
And as you read, the reason of his so doing is, because the body,
the substance is come. Christ saith he, is the body, or that which
these things were a shadow or figure of. 'The body is of Christ.'

Nor hath the apostle, since he saith 'or of the sabbath' one would
think, left any hole, out at which men's inventions could get:
but man has sought out many; and, so, many he will use.

But again, That the apostle by this word 'sabbath' intends the
seventh day sabbath, is clear; for that it is by Moses himself
counted for a sign, as we have shewed: and for that none of the
other sabbaths were a more clear shadow of the Lord Jesus Christ
than this. For that, and that alone, is called 'the rest of God':
in it God rested from all his works. Hence he calls it by way of
eminency, 'MY sabbath, and MY holy day' (Isa 56:4, 58:13).

Yet could that rest be nothing else but typical; for God, never
since the world began, really rested, but in his Son. 'This is
he,' saith God, 'in whom I am well pleased.' This sabbath then,
was God's rest typically, and was given to Israel as a sign of
his grace towards them in Christ. Wherefore when Christ was risen,
it ceased, and was no longer of obligation to bind the conscience
to the observation thereof. [Or of the sabbath.] He distinctly
singleth out this seventh day, as that which was a most noble
shadow, a most exact shadow. And then puts that with the other
together; saying, they are a shadow of things to come; and that
Christ has answered them all. 'The body is of Christ.'

Seventh, No man will, I think, deny but that Hebrews 4:45 intends
the seventh day sabbath, on which God rested from all his works;
for the text doth plainly say so: yet may the observing reader
easily perceive that both it, and the rest of Canaan also, made
mention of verse 5 were typical, as to a day made mention of verses
7 and 8 which day he calls another. He would not afterwards have
made mention of another day. If Joshua had given them rest, he
would not. Now if they had not that rest in Joshua's days, be sure
they had it not by Moses; for he was still before.

All the rests therefore that Moses gave them, and that Joshua gave
them too, were but typical of another day, in which God would give
them rest (Heb 4:9,10). And whether the day to come, was Christ,
or Heaven, it makes no matter: it is enough that they before did
fail, as always shadows do, and that therefore mention by David is,
and that afterward, made of another day. 'There remains therefore
a rest to the people of God.' A rest to come, of which the seventh
day in which God rested, and the land of Canaan, was a type; which
rest begins in Christ now, and shall be consummated in glory.

And in that he saith 'There remains a rest,' referring to that
of David, what is it, if it signifies not, that the other rests
remain not? There remains therefore a rest, a rest prefigured by
the seventh day, and by the rest of Canaan, though they are fled
and gone.

'There remains a rest'; a rest which stands not now in signs and
shadows, in the seventh day, or Canaan, but in the Son of God, and
his kingdom, to whom, and to which the weary are invited to come
for rest (Isa 28:12; Matt 11:20; Heb 4:11).

Yet this casts not out the Christians holiday or sabbath: for that
was not ordained to be a type or shadow of things to come, but
to sanctify the name of their God in, and to perform that worship
to him which was also in a shadow signified by the ceremonies of
the law, as the epistle to the Hebrews doth plentifully declare.

And I say again, the seventh day sabbath cannot be it, for the
reasons shewed afore.

Eighth, Especially if you add to all this, that nothing of the
ministration of death written and engraven in stones, is brought
by Jesus, or by his apostles, into the kingdom of Christ, as a part
of his instituted worship. Hence it is said of that ministration
in the bowels of which this seventh day sabbath is found, that it
has now NO glory; that its glory is done away, in or by Christ,
and so is laid aside, the ministration of the Spirit that excels
in glory, being come in the room thereof.

I will read the text to you. 'But if the ministration of death,
written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children
of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the
glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away: [It
was given at first with this proviso, that it should not always
retain its glory, that sanction, as a ministration]. How shall not
the ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? For if the
ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration
of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that which was made
glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that
excelleth. For if that which was done away was glorious, much more
that which remaineth is glorious' (2 Cor 3:7-11).

What can be more plain? The text says expressly, that this
ministration doth NOT remain; yea, and insinuates, that in its
first institution it was ordained with this proviso, 'It was to
be done away.' Now if in its first institution upon Sinai it was
thus ordained; and if by the coming in of the ministration of
the spirit, this ordination is now executed; that is, if by it,
and the apostle saith it, it is done away by a ministration that
remains: then where is that seventh day sabbath?

Thus therefore I have discoursed upon this fourth question: And
having shewed by this discourse that the old seventh day sabbath
is abolished and done away, and that it has nothing to do with the
churches of the Gentiles; I am next to shew what day it is that
must abide as holy to the Christians, and for them to perform
their New Testament church service in.

Take the question thus.


QUESTION V.

Since it is denied that the seventh day sabbath is moral, and
it is found that it is not to abide as a sabbath for ever in the
church, What time is to be fixed on for New Testament saints to
perform together, divine worship to God by Christ in?

Upon this question hangs the stress of all, as to the subject now
under consideration: but before I can speak distinctly to it, I
must premise, as I have in order to my speaking to the questions
before, something for the better clearing of our way--

[Therefore I remark, that] we are not now speaking of all manner
of worshipping God, nor of all times in which all manner of worship
is to be performed; but of that worship, which is church worship,
or worship that is to be performed by the assembly of saints,
when by the will of God they in all parts of his dominion assemble
together to worship him; which worship hath a prefixed time
allotted to, or for its performance, and without which it cannot,
according to the mind of God, be done. This is the time, I say,
that we are to discourse of, and not of ALL time appointed for
all manner of worship.

I do not question but that worship by the godly is performed to
God every day of the week; yea, and every night too, and that
time is appointed or allowed of God for the performance of such
worship. But this time is not fixed to the same moment or hour
universally, but is left to the discretion of the believers, as
their frame of spirit, or occasions, or exigencies, or temptations,
or duty shall require.

We meddle then only with that time that the worship aforesaid is
to be performed in; which time the law of nature as such supposes,
but the God of nature chooses. And this time as to the churches of
the Gentiles, we have proved is not that time which was assigned
to the Jews, to wit, THAT seventh day which was imposed upon them
by the ministration of death; for, as we have shewed already, that
ministration indeed is done away by a better and more glorious
ministration, the ministration of the spirit; which ministration
surely would be much more inferior than that which has now no
glory, was it defective as to this. That is, if it imposed a gospel
service, but appointed not time to perform that worship in: or
if notwithstanding all its commendation, it should be forced to
borrow of a ministration inferior to itself; that, to wit, the time
without which by no means its most solemn worship can be performed.

This then is the conclusion, that TIME to worship God in, is
required by the law of nature; but that the law of nature doth,
as such, fix it on the seventh day from the creation of the world,
that I utterly deny, by what I have said already, and have yet to
say on that behalf. Yea, I hope to make it manifest, as I have,
that this seventh day is removed; that God, by the ministration
of the spirit, has changed the time to another day, to wit, The
first day of the week. Therefore we conclude the time is fixed
for the worship of the New Testament Christians, or churches of
the Gentiles, unto that day.

Now in my discourse upon this subject, I shall,

I. Touch upon those texts that are more close, yet have a divine
intimation of this thing in them.

II. And then I shall come to texts more express.

FIRST, for those texts that are more close, yet have a divine
intimation of this thing in them.

First, The comparison that the Holy Ghost makes between the rest
of God from his works, and the rest of Christ from his, doth
intimate such a thing. 'He that is entered into his rest, he also
hath ceased from his own works, as God did from his' (Heb 4:10).

Now God rested from his works, and sanctified a day of rest to
himself, as a signal of that rest, which day he also gave to his
church as a day of holy rest likewise. And if Christ thus rested
from his own works, and the Holy Ghost says he did thus rest, he
also hath sanctified a day to himself, as that in which he hath
finished his work, and given it (that day) also to his church to
be an everlasting memento of his so doing, and that they should
keep it holy for his sake.

And see, as the Father's work was first, so his day went before;
and as the Son's work came after, so his day accordingly succeeded.
The Father's day was on the seventh day from the creation, the
Son's the first day following.

Nor may this be slighted, because the text says, as God finished
his work, so Christ finished his; He also hath ceased from his
own works as God did from his. He rested, I say, as God did; but
God rested on his resting day, and therefore so did Christ. Not
that he rested on the Father's resting day; for it is evident,
that then he had great part of his work to do; for he had not as
then got his conquest over death, but the next day he also entered
into his rest, having by his rising again, finished his work, viz.,
made a conquest over the powers of darkness, and brought life and
immortality to light through his so doing.

So then, that being the day of the rest of the Son of God, it must
needs be the day of the rest of his churches also. For God gave
his resting day to his church to be a sabbath; and Christ rested
from his own works as God did from his, therefore he also gave the
day in which he rested from his works, a sabbath to the churches,
as did the Father. Not that there are TWO sabbaths at once: the
Father's was imposed for a time, even until the Son's should come;
yea, as I have shewed you, even in the very time of its imposing
it was also ordained to be done away. Hence he saith, that
ministration 'was to be done away' (2 Cor 3:7). Therefore we plead
not for two sabbaths to be at one time, but that a succession of
time was ordained to the New Testament saints, or churches of the
Gentiles, to worship God in; which time is that in which the Son
rested from his own works as God did from his.

Second, Hence he calls himself, The 'Lord even of the sabbath
day,' as Luke 5; Matthew 12:8 shews. Now to be a LORD, is to have
dominion, dominion over a thing, and so power to alter or change
it according to that power; and where is he that dares say Christ
has not this absolutely! We will therefore conclude that it is
granted on all hands he hath. The question then is, Whether he
hath exercised that power to the demolishing or removing of the
Jews' seventh day, and establishing another in its room? The which
I think is easily answered, in that he did not rest from his own
works therein, but chose, for his own rest, to himself another
day.

Surely, had the Lord Jesus intended to have established the seventh
day to the churches of the Gentiles, he would himself in the first
place have rested from his own works therein; but since he passed
by that day, and took no notice of it, as to the finishing of
his own works, as God took notice of it when he had finished his;
it remains that he fixed upon another day, even the first of the
week; on which, by his rising again, and shewing himself to his
disciples before his passion, he made it manifest that he had
chosen, 'as Lord of the sabbath,' that day for his own rest:
consequently, and for the rest of his churches, and for his worship
to be solemnized in.

Third, And on THIS day some of the saints that slept arose, and
began their eternal sabbath (Matt 27:52,53). See how the Lord Jesus
hath glorified this day! Never was such a stamp of divine honour
put upon any other day, no not since the world began. 'And the
graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose,
and came out of the graves after his resurrection,' &c. That is,
they arose as soon as he was risen. But why was not all this done
on the seventh day? No, that day was set apart that saints might
adore God for the works of creation, and that saints through that
might look for redemption by Christ. But now a work more glorious
than that is to be done, and therefore another day is assigned
for the doing of it in. A work, I say, of redemption completed,
a day therefore by itself must be assigned for this; and some
of the saints to begin their eternal sabbath with God in heaven,
therefore a day by itself must be appointed for this. Yea, and
that this day might not want that glory that might attract the
most dim-sighted Christian to a desire after the sanction of it,
the resurrection of Christ, and also of those saints met together
on it: yea, they both did begin their eternal rest thereon.

Fourth, The psalmist speaks of a day that the Lord Jehovah, the
Son of God, has made; and saith, 'we will rejoice and be glad in
it.' But what day is this? Why the day in which Christ was made
the 'head of the corner,' which must be applied to the day in
which he was raised from the dead, which is the first of the week.

Hence Peter saith to the Jews, when he treateth of Christ before
them, and particularly of his resurrection. 'This is the stone
which WAS set at nought of you builders, which IS become the head
of the croner.' He was set at nought by them, the whole course of
his ministry unto his death, and was made the head of the corner
by God, on that day he rose from the dead. This day therefore
is the day that the Lord Jehovah has made a day of rejoicing to
the church of Christ, and we will rejoice and be glad in it (Psa
118:24).

For can it be imagined, that the Spirit by the prophet should thus
signalise this day for nothing; saying, 'This is the day which
the Lord hath made'; to no purpose? Yes, you may say, for the
resurrection of his son.

But I add, that that is not all, it is a day that the Lord has both
made for that, and that we might 'rejoice and be glad in it.'[17]
Rejoice, that is before the Lord while solemn divine worship
is performed on it, by all the people that shall partake of the
redemption accomplished then.

Fifth, God the Father again leaves such another stamp of divine
note and honour upon this day as he never before did leave upon
any; where he saith to our Lord, 'Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee' (Acts 13:33). Still, I say, having respect to
the first day of the week; for that, and no other, is the day here
intended by the apostle. This day, saith God, is the day: 'And
as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to
return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give thee the
sure mercies of David. Wherefore he saith also in another Psalm,
Thou shalt not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.' Wherefore
the day in which God did this work, is greater than that in which
he finished the work of creation; for his making of the creation
saved it not from corruption, but now he hath done a work which
corruption cannot touch, wherefore the day on which he did this,
has this note from his own mouth, THIS day, as a day that doth
transcend.

And, as I said, this day is the first of the week; for it was on
that day that God begat his beloved Son from the dead. This first
day of the week therefore, on it God found that pleasure which he
found not in the seventh day from the world's creation, for that
in it his Son did live again to him.

Now shall not Christians, when they do read that God saith, 'This
day,' and that too with reference to a work done on it by him, so
full of delight to him, and so full of life and heaven to them,
set also a remark upon it, saying, This was the day of God's
pleasure, for that his Son did rise thereon, and shall it not be
the day of my delight in him!

This is the day on which his Son was both begotten and born, and
became the first fruits to God of them that sleep; yea, and in
which also he was made by him the chief, and head of the corner;
and shall not we rejoice in it? (Acts 13:33; Heb 1:5; Col 1:18;
Rev 1:5).

Shall kings, and princes, and great men set a remark upon the day
of their birth and coronation, and expect that both subjects and
servants should do them high honour on that day, and shall the
day in which Christ was both begotten and born, be a day contemned
by Christians! And his name not be but of a common regard on that
day?

I say again, shall God, as with his finger, point, and that in
the face of the world, at this day, saying, 'Thou art my Son, this
day,' &c., and shall not Christians fear, and awake from their
employments, to worship the Lord on this day!

If God remembers it, well may I! If God says, and that with all
gladness of heart, 'Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee!' may not! ought not I also to set this day apart to sing
the songs of my redemption in?

THIS day my redemption was finished.

This day my dear Jesus revived.

This day he was declared to be the Son of God with power.

Yea this is the day in which the Lord Jesus finished a greater
work than ever yet was done in the world; yea, a work in which the
Father himself was more delighted than he was in making of heaven
and earth. And shall darkness and the shadow of death stain this
day! Or shall a cloud dwell on this day! Shall God regard this
day from above! And shall not his light shine upon this day! What
shall be done to them that curse this day, and would not that the
stars should give their light thereon. This day! After this day
was come, God never, that we read of, made mention with delight,
of the old seventh day sabbath more.

Sixth, Nor is that altogether to be slighted, when he saith,
'When he bringeth in the first-begotten into the world, Let all
the angels of God worship him.' To wit, at that very time and day
(Heb 1:6).

I know not what our expositors say of this text, but to me it
seems to be meant of his resurrection from the dead; both because
the apostle is speaking of that (v 5), and closes that argument
with this text, 'Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee?
and again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son?
And again, when he bringeth in the first-begotten into the world,
he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him.'

So then, for God's bringing of his first-begotten now into the
world, was by his raising him again from the dead after they by
crucifying of him had turned him out of the same.

Thus then God brought him into the world, never by them to be hurried
out of it again. For Christ being now raised from the dead, dies
no more; death hath no more dominion over him.

Now, saith the text, when he bringeth him thus into the world,
he requireth that worship be done unto HIM. When? That very day,
and that by all the angels of God. And if by all, then ministers
are not excluded; and if not ministers, then not churches; for
what is said to the angels, is said to the church itself (Rev
2:1-7,8,11,12,17,18,29, 3:1,6,7,13,14,22).

So then, if the question be asked, when they must worship him:
the answer is, when he brought him into the world, which was on
the first day of the week; for then he bringeth him again from the
dead, and gave the whole world and the government thereof into
his holy hand. This text therefore is of weight as to what we have
now under consideration, to wit, that the first day of the week,
the day in which God brought his first-begotten into the world,
should be the day of worshipping him by all the angels of God.

Seventh, Hence this day is called 'the Lord's day,' as John saith,
'I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day,' the day in which Jesus
rose from the dead (Rev 1:10).

'The Lord's day.' Every day, say some, is the Lord's day. Indeed
this for discourse sake may be granted; but strictly, no day can
so properly be called the Lord's day, as this first day of the
week; for that no day of the week or of the year has those badges
of the Lord's glory upon it, nor such divine grace put upon it as
has the first day of the week.

This we have already made appear in part, and shall make appear
much more before we have done therewith.

There is nothing, as I know of, that bears this title but the
Lord's supper, and this day (1 Cor 11:20; Rev 1:10). And since
Christians count it an abuse to allegorize the first, let them
also be ashamed to fantasticalize the last. The Lord's day is
doubtless the day in which he rose from the dead. To be sure it
is not the old seventh day; for from the day that he arose, to
the end of the Bible, we find not that he did hang so much as one
twist of glory upon that; but this day is beautified with glory
upon glory, and that both by the Father and the Son; by the prophets
and those that were raised from the dead thereon; therefore this
day must be more than the rest.

But we are as yet but upon divine intimations, drawn from such texts
which, if candidly considered, do very much smile upon this great
truth; namely, that the first day of the week is to be accounted
the Christian sabbath, or holy day for divine worship in the
churches of the saints. And SECOND, Now I come to the texts that
are more express.

Then First, This was the day in the which he did use to shew
himself to his people, and to congregate with them after he rose
from the dead. On the first first-day, even on the day on which
he rose from the dead, he visited his people, both when together
and apart, over, and over, and over, as both Luke and John do testify
(Luke 24; John 20). And preached such sermons of his resurrection,
and gave unto them; yea, and gave them such demonstration of the
truth of all, as was never given them from the foundation of the
world. Shewing, he shewed them his risen body; opening, he opened
their understandings; and dissipating, he so scattered their unbelief
on THIS day, as he never had done before. And this continued one
way or another even from before day until the evening.

Second, On the next first day following the church was within
again; that is, congregated to wait upon their Lord. And John so
relates the matter, as to give us to understand that they were not
so assembled together again till then. 'After eight days,' saith
he, 'again his disciples were within,' clearly concluding, that
they were not so on the days that were between, no not on the old
seventh day.

Now why should the Holy Ghost thus precisely speak of their
assembling together upon the first day, if not to confirm us in
this, that the Lord had chosen that day for the new sabbath of his
church? Surely the Apostles knew what they did in their meeting
together upon that day; yea, and the Lord Jesus also; for that he
used so to visit them when so assembled, made his practice a law
unto them. For practice is enough for us New Testament saints,
especially when the Lord Jesus himself is in the head of that
practice, and that after he rose from the dead.

Perhaps some may stumble at the word 'after,' after eight days;
but the meaning is, at the conclusion of the eighth day, or when
they had spent in a manner the whole of their sabbath in waiting
upon their Lord, then in comes their Lord, and finisheth that
their day's service to him with confirming of Thomas' faith, and
by letting drop other most heavenly treasure among them. Christ
said, he must lie three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth, yet it is evident, that he rose the third day (1 Cor 15:4).

We must take then a part for the whole, and conclude, that from
the time that the Lord Jesus rose from the dead, to the time that
he shewed his hands and his side to Thomas, eight days were almost
expired; that is, he had sanctified unto them two first days,
and had accepted that service they had performed to him therein,
as he testified by giving of them so blessed a farewell at the
conclusion of both those days.

Hence now we conclude, that this was the custom of the church at
this day, to wit, upon the first day of the week to meet together,
and to wait upon their Lord therein. For the Holy Ghost counts it
needless to make a continued repetition of things; it is enough
therefore if we have now and then mention made thereof.

Obj. But Christ shewed himself alive to them at other times also,
as in John 21 &c.

Ans. The names of all those days in which he so did are obliterated
and blotted out, that they might not be idolized; for Christ did
not set them apart for worship, but this day, the first day of
the week, by its name is kept alive in the church, the Holy Ghost
surely signifying thus much, that how hidden soever other days
were, Christ would have his day, the first day had in everlasting
remembrance among saints.

Churches also meet together now on the week days, and have the
presence of Christ with them too in their employments; but that
takes not off from them the sanction of the first day of the week,
no more than it would take away the sanction of the old seventh
day, had it still continued holy to them: wherefore this is no
let or objection to hinder our sanctifying of the first day of
the week to our God. But,

Third, Add to this, that upon Pentecost, which was the first day
of the week, mention is made of their being together again: for
Pentecost was always the morrow after the sabbath, the old seventh
day sabbath. Upon this day, I say, the Holy Ghost saith, they were
again 'with one accord together in one place.'

But oh! the glory that then attended them, by the presence of the
Holy Ghost among them: never was such a thing done as was done on
that first day until then. We will read the text, 'And when the
day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord
in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a
rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were
sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of
fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost' (Acts 2:1-4).

Here is a first day glorified! Here's a countenance given to the
day of their Christian assembling. But we will note a few things
upon it.

1. The church was now, as on other first days, all with one accord
in one place. We read not that they came together by virtue of
any precedent revelation, nor by accident, but contrariwise by
agreement, they were together 'with one accord,' or by appointment,
in pursuance of their duty, setting apart that day, as they had
done the first days afore, to the holy service of their blessed
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

2. We read that this meeting of theirs was not begun on the old
sabbaths, but when Pentecost was fully come: the Holy Ghost
intimating, that they had left now, and began to leave, the seventh
day sabbath to the unbelieving Jews.

3. Nor did the Holy Ghost come down upon them till every moment of
the old sabbath was past, Pentecost, as was said, was FULLY come
first. 'And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were
all with one accord in one place.' And then, &c.

And why was not this done on the seventh day sabbath? But, possibly,
to shew, that the ministration of death and condemnation was not
that, by or through which Christ the Lord would communicate so
good a gift unto his churches (Gal 3:1-5).

This gift must be referred to the Lord's day, the first day of the
week, to fulfil the scripture, and to sanctify yet farther this
holy day unto the use of all New Testament churches of the saints.
For since on the first day of the week our Lord did rise from
the dead, and by his special presence, I mean his personal, did
accompany his church therein, and so preach as he did, his holy
truths unto them, it was most meet that they on the same day
also should receive the first fruits of their eternal life most
gloriously.

And, I say again, since from the resurrection of Christ to this
day, the church then did receive upon the first day, but as we
read, upon no other, such glorious things as we have mentioned,
it is enough to beget in the hearts of them that love the Son
of God, a high esteem of the first day of the week. But how much
more, when there shall be joined to these, proof that it was the
custom of the first gospel church, the church of Christ at Jerusalem,
after our Lord was risen, to assemble together to wait upon God
on the first day of the week with their Lord as leader.

To say little more to this head, but only to repeat what is
written of this day of old, to wit, that it should be proclaimed
the selfsame day, to wit, the morrow after the sabbath, which is
the first day of the week, 'that it may be an holy convocation unto
you; ye shall do no servile work therein: it shall be a statute
for ever in all your dwellings' (Lev 23:21).

This ceremony was about the sheaf that was to be waved, and bread
of first fruits, which was a type of Christ; for he is unto God
'the first fruits of them that slept' (1 Cor 15:20).

This sheaf, or bread, must not be waved on the old seventh day,
but on the morrow after, which is the first day of the week, the
day in which Christ rose from the dead, and waved himself as the
first fruits of the elect unto God. Now from this day they were
to count seven sabbaths complete, and on the morrow after the
seventh sabbath, which was the first day of the week again; and
this Pentecost upon which we now are, then they were to have a
new meat offering, with meat offerings and drink offerings, &c.

And on the selfsame day they were to proclaim that that first day
should be a holy convocation unto them. The which the apostles
did, and grounded that their proclamation so on the resurrection
of Jesus Christ, not on ceremonies, that at the same day they
brought three thousand souls to God (Acts 2:41).

Now what another signal [applause] was here put upon the first
day of the week! The day in which our Lord rose from the dead,
assembled with his disciples, poured out so abundantly of the
Spirit, and gathered even by the first draught that his fishermen
made by the gospel, such a number of souls to God.

Thus then they proclaimed, and thus they gathered sinners on the
first first-day that they preached; for though they had assembled
together over and over with their Lord before therein, yet they
began not jointly to preach until this first day Pentecost.

Now, after this the apostles to the churches did never make mention
of a seventh day sabbath. For as the wave sheaf and the bread of
first fruits were a figure of the Lord Jesus, and the waving, of
his life from the dead: so that morrow after the sabbath on which
the Jews waved their sheaf, was a figure of that on which our
Lord did rise; consequently, when their morrow after the sabbath
ceased, our morrow after that began, and so has continued a blessed
morrow after their sabbath, as a holy sabbath to Christians from
that time ever since.

Fourth, We come yet more close to the custom of churches; I mean,
to the custom of the churches of the Gentiles; for as yet we
have spoken but of the practice of the church of God which was at
Jerusalem; only we will add, that the customs that were laudable
and binding with the church at Jerusalem, were with reverence to
be imitated by the churches of the Gentiles; for there was but
one law of Christ for them both to worship by.

Now then, to come to the point, to wit, that it was the custom of
the churches of the Gentiles, on the first day of the week, but
upon no other that we read of,[18] to come together to perform
divine worship to their Lord.

Hence it is said 'And upon the first day of the week, when the
disciples came together to break bread,' &c. (Acts 20:7). This is
a text, that as to matter of fact cannot be contradicted by any,
for the text saith plainly they did so, the disciples then came
together to break bread, the disciples among the Gentiles, did
so.

Thus you see that the solemnizing of a first day to holy uses was
not limited to, though first preached by the church that was at
Jerusalem. The church at Jerusalem was the mother church, and not
that at Rome, as some falsely imagine; for from this church went
out the law and the holy word of God to the Gentiles. Wherefore
it must be supposed that this meeting of the Gentiles on the first
day of the week to break bread, came to them by holy tradition[19]
from the church at Jerusalem, since they were the first that kept
the first day as holy unto the Lord their God.

And indeed, they had the best advantage to do it; for they had
their Lord in the head of them to back them to it by his presence
and preaching thereon.

But we will a little comment upon the text. 'Upon the first day
of the week.' Thus you see the day is nominated, and so is kept
alive among the churches. For in that the day is nominated on which
this religious exercise was performed, it is to be supposed that
the Holy Ghost would have it live, and be taken notice of by the
churches that succeed.

It also may be nominated to shew, that both the church at Jerusalem,
and those of the Gentiles did harmonize in their sabbath, jointly
concluding to solemnize worship on a [the same] day. And then again
to shew, that they all had left the old sabbath to the unbelievers,
and jointly chose to sanctify the day of the rising of their Lord,
to this work.

They 'came together to break bread,' to partake of the super of
the Lord. And what day so fit as the Lord's day for this? This was
to be the work of that day, to wit, to solemnize that ordinance
among themselves, adjoining other solemn worship thereto, to fill
up the day, as the following part of the verse shews. This day
therefore was designed for this work, the whole day, for the text
declares it. The first day of the week was set by them apart for
this work.

'Upon THE first day'; not upon A first day, or upon one first day,
or upon such a first day; for had he said so, we had had from
thence not so strong an argument for our purpose: but when he
saith, 'upon the first day of the week' they did it, he insinuates,
that it was their custom. [It was] also upon one of these, [that]
Paul being among them, preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow. Upon the first day: what, or which first day of this, or
that, of the third or fourth week of the month? No, but upon the
first day, every first day; for so the text admits us to judge.

'Upon the first day of the week, WHEN the disciples came together,'
supposes a custom when, or as they were wont to come together to
perform such service among themselves to God: then Paul preached
unto them, &c.

It is a text also that supposes an agreement among themselves as
to this thing. They came together then to break bread; they had
appointed to do it then, for that then was the day of their Lord's
resurrection, and that in which he himself congregated after he
revived, with the first gospel church, the church at Jerusalem.

Thus you see, that breaking of bread, was the work, the work that
by general consent was agreed to be by the churches of the Gentiles
performed upon the first day of the week. I say, by the churches;
for I doubt not but that the practice here, was also the practice
of the rest of the Gentile churches, even as it had been before
the practice of the church at Jerusalem.

For this practice now did become universal, and so this text implies;
for he speaks here universally of the practice of all disciples
as such, though he limits Paul preaching to that church with whom
he at present personally was. Upon the first day of the week,
'when the disciples came together to break bread,' Paul being at
that time at Troas preached to them on that day.

Thus then you see how the Gentile churches did use to break bread,
not on the old sabbath, but on the first day of the week. And, I
say, they had it from the church at Jerusalem; where the apostles
were first seated, and beheld the way of their Lord with their
eyes.

Now, I say, since we have so ample an example, not only of the
church at Jerusalem, but also of the churches of the Gentiles, for
the keeping of the first day to the Lord, and that as countenanced
by Christ and his apostles, we should not be afraid to tread in
their steps, for their practice is the same with law and commandment.
But,

Fifth, We will add to this another text. 'Now [saith Paul]
concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order
to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye. Upon the first day of
the week let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath
prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come' (1 Cor
16:1,2).

This text some have greatly sought to evade, counting the duty
here, on this day to be done, a duty too inferior for the sanction
of an old seventh day sabbath; when yet to show mercy to an ass
on the old sabbath, was a work which our Lord no ways condemns
(Luke 13:15, 14:5).

But to pursue our design, we have a duty enjoined, and that of
no inferior sort. If charity be indeed as it is, the very bond of
perfectness: and if without it all our doings, yea and sufferings
too, are not worthy so much as a rush (1 Cor 13; Col 3:14). we
have here a duty, I say, that a seventh day sabbath, when in force,
was not too big for it to be performed in.

The work now to be done, was, as you see, to bestow their charity
upon the poor; yea, to provide for time to come. And I say, it
must be collected upon the first day of the week. Upon THE first
day; not A first day, as signifying one or two, but upon THE
first day, even every first day; for so your ancient Bibles have
it;[20] also our later must be so understood, or else Paul had left
them to whom he did write, utterly at a loss. For if he intended
not every first day, and yet did not specify a particular one, it
could hardly even have been understood which first day he meant.
But we need not stand upon this. This work was a work for A
first-day, for EVERY first day of the week.

Note again that we have this duty here commanded and enforced by
an apostolical order: 'I have given order,' saith Paul, for this;
and his orders, as he saith in another place, 'are the commandments
of the Lord.' You have it in the same epistle (chap. 14:37).

Whence it follows, that there was given even by the apostles
themselves, a holy respect to the first day of the week above all
the days of the week; yea, or of the year besides.

Further, I find also by this text, that this order is universal.
I have, saith he, given this order not only to you, but to the
churches of Galatia. Consequently to all other that were concerned
in this collection (2 Cor 8, 9, &c.).

Now this, whatever others may think, puts yet more glory upon the
first day of the week. For in that all the churches are commanded,
as to make their collections, so to make them on this day: what
is it, but that this day, by reason of the sanction that Christ
put upon it, was of virtue to sanctify the offering through and
by Christ Jesus, as the altar and temple afore did sanctify the
gift and gold that was, and was offered on them. The proverb is,
'The better day, the better deed.' And I believe, that things
done on the Lord's day, are better done, than on other days of
the week, in his worship.

Obj. But yet, say some, here are no orders to keep this first day
holy to the Lord.

Ans. 1. That is supplied; for that by this very text this day is
appointed, above all the days of the week, to do this holy duty
in.

2.. You must understand that this order is but additional, and
now enjoined to fill up that which was begun as to holy exercise
of religious worship by the churches long before.

3. The universality of the duty being enjoined to this day, supposes
that this day was universally kept by the churches as holy already.

4. And let him that scrupleth this, shew me, if he can, that God
by the mouth of his apostles did ever command that all the churches
should be confined to this or that duty on such a day, and yet
put no sanction upon that day; or that he has commanded that this
work should be done on the first day of the week, and yet has
reserved other church ordinances as a public solemnization of
worship to him, to be done of another day, as of a day more fit,
more holy.

5. If charity, if a general collection for the saints in the
churches is commanded on this day, and on no other day but this
day; for church collection is commanded on no other, there must
be a reason for it: and if that reason had not respect to the
sanction of the day, I known to why the duty should be so strictly
confined to it.

6. But for the apostle now to give with this a particular command
to the churches to sanctify that day as holy unto the Lord, had
been utterly superfluous; for that they already, and that by the
countenance of their Lord, and his church at Jerusalem, had done.

Before now, I say, it was become a custom, as by what hath been
said already is manifest: wherefore what need that their so solemn
a practice be imposed again upon the brethren? An intimation now
of a continued respect thereto, by the very naming of the day, is
enough to keep the sanctity thereof on foot in the churches. How
much more then, when the Lord is still adding holy duty to holy
duty, to be performed upon that day. So then, in that the apostle
writes to the churches to do this holy duty on the first day of
the week, he puts them in mind of the sanction of the day,
and insinuates, that he would still have them have a due respect
thereto.

Quest. But is there yet another reason why this holy duty should,
in special as it is, be commanded to be performed on the first
day of the week?

Ans. 1. Yes: for that now the churches were come together in their
respective places, the better to agree about collections, and to
gather them. You know church worship is a duty, so long as we are
in the world, and so long also is this of making collections for
the saints. And for as much as the apostle speaks here, as I have
hinted afore, of a church collection, when is it more fit to be
done, than when the church is come together upon the first day of
the week to worship God?

2. This part of worship is most comely to be done upon the first
day of the week, and that at the close of that day's work. For
thereby the church shows, not only her thankfulness to God for
a sabbath day's mercy, but also returneth him, by giving to the
poor, that sacrifice for their benefit that is most behoveful to
make manifest their professed subjection to Christ (Prov 19:17;
2 Cor 9:12-15). It is therefore necessary, that this work be done
on the first day of the week, for a comely close of the worship
that we perform to the Lord our God on that day.

3. On the first day of the week, when the church is performing of
holy worship unto God, then that of collection for the saints is
most meet to be performed; because then, in all likelihood, our
hearts will be most warm with the divine presence; consequently
most open and free to contribute to the necessity of the saints.
You know, that a man when his heart is open, is taken with some
excellent thing; then, if at all, it is most free to do something
for the promoting thereof.

Why, waiting upon God in the way of his appointments, opens, and
makes free, the heart to the poor: and because the first day of
the week was it in which now such solemn service to him was done,
therefore also the apostle commanded, that upon the same day also,
as on a day most fit, this duty of collecting for the poor should
be done. 'For God loveth a cheerful giver' (2 Cor 9:6,7).

Wherefore the apostle by this, takes the churches as it were at
the advantage, and as we say, [strikes] while the iron is hot,
to the intent he might, what in him lay, make their collections,
not sparing nor of a grudging mind, but to flow from cheerfulness.
And the first day of the week, though its institution be set aside,
doth most naturally tend to this; because it is the day, the only
day, on which we received such blessings from God (Acts 3:26).

This is the day on which, at first, it rained manna all day long
from heaven upon the new testament church, and so continues to do
this day.

Oh! the resurrection of Christ, which was on this day, and the
riches that we receive thereby. Though it should be, and is, I
hope thought on every day; yet when the first of the week is fully
come! Then to-day! This day! This is the day to be warmed; this
day he was begotten from the dead.

The thought of this, will do much with an honest mind: this is the
day, I say, that the first saints did find, and that after saints
do find the blessings of God come down upon them; and therefore
this is the day here commanded to be set apart for holy duties.

And although what I have said may be but little set by of some,
yet, for a closing word as to this, I do think, could but half
so much be produced from the day Christ rose from the dead quite
down [to the end of revelation], for the sanction of a seventh day
sabbath in the churches of the Gentiles, it would much sway with
me. But the truth is, neither doth the apostle Paul, nor any of
his fellows, so much as once speak one word to the churches that
shows the least regard, as to conscience to God, of a seventh day
sabbath more. No, the first day, the first day, the first day, is
now all the cry in the churches by the apostles, for the performing
church worship in to God. Christ began it on THAT day: then the
Holy Ghost seconded it on that day: then the churches practised
it on that day. And to conclude; the apostle by the command now
under consideration, continues the sanction of that day to the
churches to the end of the world.

But as to the old seventh day sabbath, as hath been said afore in
this treatise, Paul, who is the apostle of the Gentiles, has so
taken away that whole ministration in the bowels of which it is;
yea, and has so stript it of its old testament grandeur, both by
terms and arguments, that it is strange to me it should by any be
still kept up in the churches; specially, since the same apostle,
and that at the same time, has put a better ministration in its
place (2 Cor 3).

But when the consciences of good men are captivated with an error,
none can stop them from a prosecution thereof, as if were itself
of the best of truths.

Obj. But Paul preached frequently on the old sabbath, and that
after the resurrection of Christ.

Ans. To the unbelieving Jews and their proselytes, I grant he
did. But we read not that he did it to any new testament church
on that day: nor did he celebrate the instituted worship of Christ
in the churches on that day. For Paul, who had before cast out
the ministration of death, as that which had no glory, would not
now take thereof any part for new testament instituted worship;
for he knew that that would veil the heart, and blind the mind
from that, which yet instituted worship was ordained to discover.

He preached then on the seventh day sabbath, of a divine and crafty
love to the salvation of the unbelieving Jews.

I say, he preached now on that day to them and their proselytes,
because that day was theirs by their estimation. He did it, I say,
of great love to their souls, that if possible, he might save some
of them.

Wherefore, if you observe, you shall still find, that where it is
said that he preached on that day, it was to that people, not to
the churches of Christ. See Acts 9:20, 13:14-16, 16:13, 17:1-3,
18:4.

Thus, though he had put away the sanction of that day as to himself,
and had left the Christians that were weak to their liberty as to
conscience to it, yet he takes occasion upon it to preach to the
Jews that still were wedded to it, the faith, that they might be
saved by grace.

Paul did also many other things that were Jewish and ceremonial,
for which he had, as then, no conscience at all, as to any sanction
that he believed was in them.

As his circumcising of Timothy (Acts 16:1-3).

His shaving of his head (Acts 18:18).

His submitting to Jewish purifications (Acts 21:24-26).

His acknowledging of himself a Pharisee (chap. 23:6).

His implicitly owning of Ananias for high priest after Christ was
risen from the dead (Acts 23:1-5).

He tells us also that, 'unto the Jews he became as a Jew' that he
might save the Jew. And 'without law,' to them that were without
law, that also he might gain them. Yea, he became, as he saith,
'all things to all men,' that he might gain the more, as it is 1
Corinthians 9:19-23.

But these things, as I said, he did not of conscience to the
things; for he knew that their sanction was gone. Nor would he
suffer them to be imposed upon the churches directly or indirectly;
no, not by Peter himself (Gal 2:11).

Were I in Turkey with a church of Jesus Christ, I would keep the
first day of the week to God, and for the edification of his
people: and would also preach the word to the infidels on their
sabbath day, which is our Friday; and be glad too, if I might
have such opportunity to try to persuade them to a love of their
own salvation.

Obj. But if the seventh day sabbath is, as you say, to be laid
aside by the churches of the Gentiles, why doth Christ say to
his, 'Pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on
the sabbath day?' For, say some, by this saying it appears, that
the old seventh day sabbath, as you have called it, will as to
the sanction of it, abide in force after Christ is ascended into
heaven.

Ans. I say first, these words were spoken to the Jewish Christians,
not to the Gentile churches. And the reason of this first hint,
you will see clearer afterwards.

The Jews had several sabbaths; as, their seventh day sabbath, their
monthly sabbaths, their sabbath of years, and their jubilee (Lev
25).

Now if he means their ordinary sabbaths, or that called the seventh
day sabbath, why doth he join the winter thereto? for in that he
joineth the winter with that sabbath that he exhorteth them to
pray their flight might not be in, it should seem that he meaneth
rather their sabbath of years, or their jubilee, which did better
answer one to another than one day and a winter could.

And I say again, that Christ should suppose that their flight
should, or might last some considerable part of a winter, and
yet that then they should have their rest on those seventh day
sabbaths, is a little beside my reason, if it be considered again,
that the Gentiles before whom they were then to fly, were enemies
to their sabbath, and consequently would take opportunity at their
sabbaths to afflict them so much the more. Wherefore, I would that
they who plead for a continuation of the seventh day sabbath from
this text, would both better consider it, and the incoherence that
seems to be betwixt such a sabbath and a winter.

But again, were it granted that it is the seventh day sabbath that
Christ here intendeth; yet, since as we have proved, the sanction
before this was taken away; I mean before this flight should be,
he did not press them to pray thus because by any law of heaven
they should then be commanded to keep it holy; but because some
would, through their weakness, have conscience of it till then.
And such would, if their flight should happen thereon, be as much
grieved and perplexed, as if it yet stood obligatory to them by
a law.

This seems to have some truth in it, because among the Jews that
believed, there continued a long time many that were wedded yet to
the law, to the ceremonial part thereof, and were not so clearly
evangelized as the churches of the Gentiles were. 'Thou seest
brother,' said James to Paul, 'how many thousands of Jews there are
which believe; and they are all zealous of the law' (Acts 21:20,
15:5).

Of these, and such weak unbelieving Jews, perhaps Christ speaks,
when he gives this exhortation to them to pray thus; whose
consciences he knew would be weak, and being so, would bind when
they were entangled with an error, as fast as if it bound by a
law indeed.

Again, though the seventh day sabbath and ceremonies lost their
sanction at the resurrection of Christ, yet they retained some kind
of being in the church of the Jews, until the desolation spoken
of by Daniel should be.

Hence it is said, that then the oblation and sacrifices shall
cease (Dan 9:27). And hence it is, that Jerusalem and the temple
are still called the holy place, even until this flight should be
(Matt 24:15).

Now if Jerusalem and the temple are still called holy, even after
the body and substance, of which they were shadows, were come;
then no marvel though some to that day that believed were entangled
therewith, &c. For it may very well be supposed that all conscience
of them would not be quite taken away, until all reason for that
conscience should be taken away also. But when Jerusalem, and the
temple, and the Jews' worship, by the Gentiles was quite extinct
by ruins, then in reason that conscience did cease. And it seems
by some texts, that all conscience to them was not taken away
till then.

Quest. But what kind of being had the seventh day sabbath, and
other Jewish rites and ceremonies, that by Christ's resurrection
were taken away?

Ans. These things had a virtual and a nominal being. As to their
virtual being, that died that day Christ did rise from the dead,
they being crucified with him on the cross (Col 2).

But now, when the virtual being was gone, they still with the weak
retained their name, among many of the Jews that believed, until
the abomination that maketh desolate stood in the holy place: for
in Paul's time they were, as to that, but ready to vanish away.

Now, I say, they still retaining their nominal grandeur, though
not by virtue of a law, they could not, till time and dispensation
came, be swept out of the way. We will make what hath been said,
as to this, out by a familiar similitude.

There is a lord or great man dies; now being dead, he has lost
his virtual life. He has now no relation to a wife, to children,
virtually; yet his name still abides, and that in that family, to
which otherwise he is dead. Wherefore they embalm him, and also
keep him above ground for many days. Yea, he is still reverenced
by those of the family, and that in several respects. Nor doth
any thing but time and dispensation wear this name away.

Thus then the Old Testament signs and shadows went off the stage
in the church of Christ among the Jews. They lost their virtue
and signification when Christ nailed them to his cross (Col 2).
But as to their name, and the grandeur that attended that, it
continued with many that were weak, and vanished not, but when
the abomination that made them desolate came.

The sum then and conclusion of the matter is this; the seventh
day sabbath lost its glory when that ministration in which it was,
lost its: But yet the name thereof might abide a long time with
the Jewish legal Christians, and so might become obligatory still,
though not by the law, to their conscience, even as circumcision
and other ceremonies did: and to them it would be as grievous to
fly on that day, as if by law it was still in force.

For, I say, to a weak conscience, that law which has lost its
life, may yet through their ignorance, be as binding as if it
stood still upon the authority of God.

Things then become obligatory these two ways. (1.) By an institution
of God. (2.) By the over-ruling power of a man's misinformed
conscience. And although by virtue of an institution divine worship
is acceptable to God by Christ, yet conscience will make that a
man shall have but little ease if such rules and dictates as it
imposes be not observed by him.

This is my answer, upon a supposition that the seventh day sabbath
is in this text intended: and the answer, I think, stands firm
and good.

Also, there remains, notwithstanding this objection, no divine
sanction in or upon the old seventh day sabbath.

Some indeed will urge, that Christ here meant the first day of
the week, which here he puts under the term of sabbath. But this
is foreign to me, so I waive it till I receive more satisfaction
in the thing.

Quest. But if indeed the first day of the week be the new christian
sabbath, why is there no more spoken of its institution in the
testament of Christ?

Ans. No more! What need is there of more than enough! Yea, there
is a great deal found in the testament of the Lord Jesus to prove
its authority divine.

(1.) For we have shewed from sundry scriptures, that from the very
day our Lord did rise from the dead, the church at Jerusalem, in
which the twelve apostles were, did meet together on that day, and
had the Lord himself for their preacher, while they were auditors;
and thus the day began.

(2.) We have shewed that the Holy Ghost, the third person in the
Trinity, did second this of Christ, in coming down from heaven
upon this day to manage the apostles in their preaching; and in
that very day so managed them in that work, that by his help they
then did bring three thousand souls to God.

(3.) We have shewed also, that after this the gentile churches did
solemnize this day for holy worship, and that they had from Paul
both countenance and order so to do.

And now I will add, that more need not be spoken: for the practice
of the first church, with their Lord in the head of them to manage
them in that practice, is as good as many commands. What then
shall we say, when we see a first practice turned into holy custom?

I say, moreover, that though a seventh day sabbath is not natural
to man as man, yet our christian holy day is natural to us as
saints, if our consciences are not clogged before with some old
fables, or Jewish customs.

But if an old religion shall get footing and rooting in us, though
the grounds thereof be vanished away, yet the man concerned will
be hard put to it, should he be saved, to get clear of his clouds,
and devote himself to that service of God which is of his own
prescribing.

Luther himself, though he saw many things were without ground which
he had received for truth, had yet work hard enough, as himself
intimates, to get his conscience clear from all those roots and
strings of inbred error.

But, I say, to an untainted and well bred Christian, we have good
measure, shaken together, and running over, for our christian
Lord's day. And I say again, that the first day of the week, and
the spirit of such a Christian, suit one another as nature suiteth
nature; for there is as it were a natural instinct in Christians,
as such, when they understand what in a first day was brought
forth, to fall in therewith to keep it holy to their Lord.

1. The first day of the week! Why it was the day of our life. 'After
two days he will revive us,' and in the third day 'we shall live
in his sight.' 'After two days' there is the Jews' preparation,
and seventh day sabbath, quite passed over; and in the third day,
that is the first day of the week, which is the day our Lord did
rise from the dead, we began to live by him in the sight of God
(Hosea 6:2; John 20:1; 1 Cor 15:4).

2. The first day of the week! That is the day in which, as I hinted
before, our Lord was wont to preach to his disciples after he rose
form the dead; in which also he did use to shew them his hands
and his feet (Luke 24:38,39; John 20:25). To the end they might
be confirmed in the truth of his victory over death and the grave
for them. The day in which he made himself known to them in breaking
bread. The day in which he so plentifully poured out the Holy Ghost
upon them. The day in which the church, both at Jerusalem and
those of the Gentiles, did use to perform to God divine worship:
all which has before been sufficiently proved. And shall we not
imitate our Lord, nor the church that was immediately acted[21]
by him in this, and the churches their fellows? Shall, I say, the
Lord Jesus do all this in his church, and they together with him!
Shall the churches of the Gentiles also fall in with their Lord
and with their mother at Jerusalem herein! And again, shall all
this be so punctually committed to sacred story, with the day in
which these things were done, under denomination, over and over,
saying, These things were done on the first day, on the first
day, on the first day of the week, while all other days are, as to
name, buried in everlasting oblivion! And shall we not take that
notice thereof as to follow the Lord Jesus and the churches herein?
Oh stupidity!

3. This day of the week! They that make but observation of what
the Lord did of old, to as many sinners, and with his churches on
this day, must needs conclude, that in this day the treasures of
heaven were broken up, and the richest things therein communicated
to his church. Shall the children of this world be, as to this
also, wiser in their generations than the children of light, and
former saints, upon whose shoulders we pretend to stand, go beyond
us here also.

Jacob could by observation gather that the place where he lay down
to sleep was no other but the house of God, and the very gate of
heaven (Gen 28:17).

Laban could gather by observation, that the Lord blessed him for
Jacob's sake (Gen 30:27).

David could gather by what he met with upon Mount Moriah, that that
was the place where God would have the temple builded, therefore
he sacrificed there (1 Chron 21:26-28, 22:1,2; 2 Chron 3:1).

Ruth was to mark the place where Boaz lay down to sleep, and shall
not Christians also mark the day in which our Lord rose from the
dead (Ruth 3:4).

I say, shall we not mark it, when so many memorable things were
done on it, for, and to and in the churches of God! Let saints be
ashamed to think that such a day should be looked over, or counted
common, when tempted to it by Satan, when [it was] kept to religious
service of old, and when beautified with so many divine characters
of sanctity as we have proved, by Christ, his church, the Holy
Ghost, and the command of apostolical authority it was.

But why, I say, is this day, on which our Lord rose from the dead,
nominated as it is? why was it not sufficient to say 'he rose
again,' or, he rose again the third day? without a specification of
the very name of the day. For, as was said afore, Christ appeared
to his disciples, after his resurrection, on other days also, yea,
and thereon did miracles to. Why then did not these days live?
Why was their name, for all that, blotted out, and this day only
kept alive in the churches?

The day on which Christ was born of a virgin; the day of his
circumcision, the day of his baptism, and of his transfiguration,
are not by their names committed by the Holy Ghost to holy writ
to be kept alive in the world, nor yet such days in which he did
many great and wonderful things. But THIS day, this day is still
nominated; the first day of the week is the day. I say, why are
things thus left with us? But because we, as saints of old, should
gather, and separate, what is of divine authority from the rest.
For in that this day is so often nominated while all other days
lie dead in their graves, it is as much as if God should say,
Remember the first day of the week to keep it holy to the Lord
your God.

And set this aside, and I know not what reason can be rendered, or
what prophecy should be fulfilled by the bare naming of the day.

When God, of old, did sanctify for the use of his church a day,
as he did many, he always called them either by the name of the
day of the month, or of the week, or by some other signal by which
they might be certainly known, why should it not then be concluded,
that for this very reason the first day of the week is thus often
nominated by the Holy Ghost in the testament of Christ?

Moreover, he that takes away the first day, as to this service,
leaves us now no day, as sanctified of God, for his solemn worship
to be by his churches performed in. As for the seventh day sabbath,
that, as we have seen, is gone to its grave with the signs and
shadows of the Old Testament. Yea, and has such a dash left upon
it by apostolical authority, that it is enough to make a Christian
fly from it for ever (2 Cor 3).

Now, I say, since that is removed by God: if we should suffer the
first day also to be taken away by man, what day that has a divine
stamp upon it, would be left for us to worship God in?

Alas! the first day of the week is the Christian's market day,
that which they so solemnly trade in for sole provision for all
the week following. This is the day that they gather manna in. To
be sure the seventh day sabbath is not that. For of old the people
of God could never find manna on that day. 'On the seventh day
[said Moses] which is the sabbath, in it there shall be none' (Exo
16:26).

Any day of the week manna could be found, but on that day it was
not to be found upon the face of the ground. But now our first
day is the manna day; the only day that the churches of the New
Testament, even of old, did gather manna in. But more of this
anon.

Nor will it out of my mind but that it is a very high piece of
ingratitude, and of uncomely behaviour, to deny the Son of God
his day, the Lord's day, the day that he has made. And as we have
shewed already, this first day of the week is it; yea, and a great
piece of unmannerliness is it too, for any, notwithstanding the
old seventh day is so degraded as it is, to attempt to impose it on
the Son of God. To impose a day upon him which yet Paul denies to
be a branch of the ministration of the Spirit, and of righteousness.
Yea, to impose a part of that ministration which he says plainly
'which was done away,' for that a better ministration stript it
of its glory, is a high attempt indeed (2 Cor 3).

Yet again, the apostle smites the teachers of the law upon the
mouth, saying, 'understanding neither what they say, nor whereof
they affirm' (1 Tim 1:7).

The seventh day sabbath, was indeed God's rest from the works of
creation; but yet the rest that he found in what the first day of
the week did produce, for Christ was born from the dead on it,
more pleased him than did all the seventh days that ever the world
brought forth: wherefore, as I said before, it cannot be but that
the well-bred Christian must set apart this day for solemn worship
to God, and to sanctify his name therein.

Must the church of old be bound to remember that night in which
they did come out of Egypt! must Jephtha's daughter have four days
for the virgins of Israel yearly to lament her hard case in! Yea,
must two days be kept by the church of old, yearly, for their being
delivered from Haman's fury! And must not one to the world's end
be kept by the saints for the Son of God their Redeemer, for all
he has delivered them from a worse than Pharaoh or Haman, even
from the devil, and death, and sin, and hell! Oh stupidity! (Exo
12:24; Judg 11:39,40; Esth 9:26-32).

A day! say some, God forbid but he should have a day. But what
day? Oh! The old day comprised within the bounds and bowels of
the ministration of death.

And is this the love that thou hast to thy Redeemer, to keep that
day to him for all the service that he hath done for thee, which
has a natural tendency in it to draw thee off from the consideration
of the works of thy redemption, to the creation of the world! Oh
stupidity!

But why must he be imposed upon? Has he chosen that day? Did he
finish his work thereon? Is there in all the New Testament of our
Lord, from the day he rose from the dead, to the end of his holy
book, one syllable that signifies in the least the tenth part of
such a thing? where is the scripture that saith that this Lord of
the sabbath commanded his church, from that time, to do any part
of church service thereon? Where do we find the churches to gather
together thereon?

But why the seventh day? What is it? Take but the shadow thereof
away. Or what shadow now is left in it since its institution as
to divine service is taken long since from it?

Is there any thing in the works that was done in that day, more
than shadow, or that in the least tends otherwise to put us in mind
of Christ; and he being come, what need have we of that shadow?
And I say again, since that day was to be observed by a ceremonial
method, and no way else, as we find; and since ceremonies have
ceased, what way of divine appointment is there left to keep that
old sabbath by Christians in?

If they say, ceremonies have ceased. By the same argument, so
is the sanction of the day in which they were to be performed. I
would gladly see the place, if it is to be found, where it is said,
That day retains its sanction, which yet has lost that method of
service which was of God appointed for the performance of worship
to him thereon.

When Canaan worship fell, the sanction of Canaan fell. When temple
worship, and altar worship, and the sacrifices of the Levitical
priesthood fell, down also came the things themselves. Likewise
so, when the service, or shadow and ceremonies of the seventh day
sabbath fell, the seventh day sabbath fell likewise.

On the seventh day sabbath, as I told you, manna was not to be found.
But why? For that that day was of Moses and of the ministration
of death. But manna was not of him. Moses, saith Christ, 'gave
you not that bread of heaven' (John 6:31,32). Moses, as was said,
gave that sabbath in tables of stone, and God gave that manna from
heaven. Christ, nor his Father, gives grace by the law; no not by
that law in which is contained the old seventh day sabbath itself.

The law is not of faith, why then should grace be by Christians
expected by observation of the law? The law, even the law written
and engraven in stones, enjoins perfect obedience thereto on pain
of the curse of God. Nor can that part of it now under consideration,
according as is required, be fulfilled by any man, was the ceremony
thereto belonging, allowed to be laid aside (Isa 58:13). Never man
yet did keep it perfectly, except he whose name is Jesus Christ:
in him therefore we have kept it, and by him are set free from
that law, and brought under the ministration of the Spirit.

But why should we be bound to seek manna on that day, on which
God says, none shall be found.

Perhaps it will be said, that the sanction of that day would not
admit that manna should be gathered on it.

But that was not all, for on that day there was none to be found.
And might I choose, I had rather sanctify that day to God on which
I might gather this bread of God all day long, then set my mind
at all upon that in which no such bread was to be had.

The Lord's day, as was said, is to the Christians the principal
manna day.

On this day, even on it manna in the morning very early was gathered
by the disciples of our Lord, as newly springing out of the ground.
The true bread of God: the sheaf of first fruits, which is Christ
from the dead, was ordained to be waved before the Lord on the
morrow after the sabbath, the day on which our Lord ceased from
his own work as God did from his (Lev 23).

Now therefore the disciples found their green ears of corn indeed!
Now they read life, both in and out of the sepulchre in which the
Lord was laid. Now they could not come together nor speak one to
another, but either their Lord was with them, or they had heart
enflaming tidings from him. Now cries one and says, The Lord is
risen: And then another and says, He hath appeared to such and
such.

Now comes tidings to the eleven that their women were early at
the sepulchre, where they had a vision of angels that told them
their Lord was risen: Then comes another and says, The Lord is
risen indeed. Two also came from Emmaus and cried, We have seen
the Lord: and by and by, while they yet were speaking, their Lord
shows himself in the midst of them.

Now he calls to their mind some of their eminent passages of his
life, and eats and drinks in their presence, and opens the scriptures
to them: yea, and opens their understanding too, that their hearing
might not be unprofitable to them; all which continued from early
in the morning till late at night. Oh! what a manna day was this
to the church. And more than all this you will find, if you read
but the four evangelists upon this subject.

Thus began the day after the sabbath, and thus it has continued
through all ages to this very day. Never did the seventh day sabbath
yield manna to Christians. A new world was now begun with the
poor church of God, for so said the Lord of the sabbath, 'Behold,
I make all things new.' A new covenant, and why not then a new
resting day to the church? Or why must the old sabbath be joined
to this new ministration? let him that can, show a reason for it.

Christians, if I have not been so large upon things as some might
expect; know, that my brevity on this subject is, from consideration
that must needs not be spoken thereto, and because I may have
occasion to write a second part.

Christians, beware of being entangled with old testament ministrations,
lest by one you be brought into many inconveniencies.

I have observed, that though the Jewish rites have lost their
sanction, yet some that are weak in judgment, do bring themselves
into bondage by them. Yea, so high have some been carried as to
a pretended conscience to these that they have at last proceeded
to circumcision, to many wives, and the observation of many bad
things besides.

Yea, I have talked with some pretending to Christianity, who
have said, and affirmed, as well as they could, that the Jewish
sacrifices must up again.

But do you give no heed to these Jewish fables 'That turn from
the truth' (Titus 1:14). Do you, I say, that love the Lord Jesus,
keep close to his testament, his word, his gospel, and observe
HIS holy day.

And this caution in conclusion I would give, to put stop to this
Jewish ceremony, to wit, That a seventh day sabbath pursued according
to its imposition by law, (and I know not that it is imposed by
the apostles) leads to blood and stoning to death those that do but
gather sticks thereon (Num 15:32-36). A thing which no way becomes
the gospel, that ministration of the Spirit and of righteousness
(2 Cor 3). Nor yet the professors thereof (Luke 9:54-56).

Nor can it with fairness be said, that that sabbath day remains,
although the law thereof is repealed. For confident I am, that
there is no more ground to make such a conclusion, than there is
to say, that circumcision is still of force, though the law for
cutting of the uncircumcised is by the gospel made null and void.

I told you also in the epistle, that if the fifth commandment was
the first that was with promise; then it follows, that the fourth,
or that seventh day sabbath, had no promise entailed to it. Whence
it follows, that where you read in the prophet of a promise annexed
to a sabbath, it is best to understand it of our gospel sabbath
(Isa 56).

Now if it be asked, What promise is entailed to our first day
sabbath? I answer, The biggest of promises. For,

First, The resurrection of Christ was tied by promise to this day,
and to none other. He rose the third day after his death, and that
was the first day of the week, 'according' to what was fore-promised
in the scriptures (Hosea 6:1,2; 1 Cor 15:3-6).

Second, That we should live before God by him, is a promise to be
fulfilled on this day; 'After two days will he revive us: in the
third day--we shall live in his sight' (Hosea 6:2). See also Isaiah
26:19 and compare them again with 1 Corinthians 15:4.

Third, The great promise of the new testament, to wit, the pouring
out of the Spirit, fixeth upon these days; and so he began in the
most wonderful effusion of it upon Pentecost, which was the first
day of the week, that the scriptures might be fulfilled (Acts
2:16-19).

Nor could these three promises be fulfilled upon any other days,
for that the scripture had fixed them to the first day of the
week.

I am of opinion that these things, though but briefly touched upon,
cannot be fairly objected against, however they may be disrelished
by some.

Nor can I believe, that any part of our religion, as we are
Christians, stand in not kindling of fires, and not seething of
victuals, or in binding of men not to stir out of those places on
the seventh day, in which at the dawning thereof they were found.
And yet these are ordinances belonging to that seventh day sabbath
(Exo 16:23-29).

Certainly it must needs be an error to impose these things by divine
authority upon new testament believers, our worship standing now
in things more weighty, spiritual and heavenly.

Nor can it be proved, as I have hinted before, that this day was,
or is to be imposed without those ordinances, with others in other
places mentioned and adjoined, for the sanction of that day they
being made necessary parts of that worship that was to be performed
thereon.

I have charity for those that abuse themselves and their Lord, by
their preposterous zeal and affection for the continuing of this
day in the churches. For I conclude, that if they did either
believe, or think of the incoherence that this day with its
rites and ceremonies has with the ministration of the Spirit, our
new testament ministration, they would not so stand int heir own
light as they do, nor so stiffly plead for a place for it in the
churches of the Gentiles. But as Paul insinuates in other cases,
there is an aptness in men to be under the law because they do
not hear it (Gal 4).

Nor will it out of my mind, but if the seventh day sabbath was
by divine authority, and to be kept holy by the churches of the
Gentiles, it should not have so remained among the Jews, Christ's
deadliest enemies, and have been kept so much hid from the
believers, his best friends. For who has retained the pretended
sanction of that day from Christ's time, quite down in the world,
but the Jews, and a few Jewish Gentiles, I will except some. But,
I say, since a sabbath is that without which the great worship
of God under the gospel cannot be well performed: how can it be
thought, that it should as to the knowledge of it, be confined to
so blasphemous a generation of the Jews, with whom that worship
is not?

I will rather conclude, that those Gentile professors that adhere
thereto are Jewified, legalized, and so far gone back from the
authority of God, who from such bondage has set his churches free.

I do at this time but hint upon things, reserving a fuller argument
upon them for a time and place more fit; where, and when, I may
perhaps also show, some other wild notions of those that so stiffly
cleave to this.

Meantime, I entreat those who are captivated with this opinion,
not to take it ill at my hand that I thus freely speak my mind.
I entreat them also to peruse my book without prejudice to my
person. The truth is, one thing that has moved me to this work, is
the shame that has covered the face of my soul, when I have thought
of the fictions and fancies that are growing among professors. And
while I see each fiction turn itself to a faction, to the loss of
that good spirit of love, and that oneness that formerly was with
good men.

I doubt not but some unto whom this book may come, have had seal
from God, that the first day of the week is to be sanctified by
the church to Jesus Christ. Not only from his testimony, which
is, and should be, the ground of our practice; but also, for that
the first conviction that the Holy Ghost made upon their consciences,
to make them know that they were sinners, began with them for
breaking this sabbath day; which day, by that same spirit was told
them, was that now called the first day, and not the day before,
and the Holy Ghost doth not use to begin this work with a lie,
which first conviction the Spirit has followed so close, with other
things tending to complete the same work, that the soul from so
good a beginning could not rest until it found rest in Christ.
Let this then to such be a second token that the Lord's day is by
them to be kept in commemoration of their Lord and his resurrection,
and of what he did on this day for their salvation. Amen.


FOOTNOTES:

1. Dialogues, 1st chapter, xxv.

2. Answer to More.

3. Institutes, b. ii. ch. 8.

4. Com. on Gal. 4:9.

5. The word 'moral' is here used to mark the difference between
obligations binding on all mankind and a positive or limited
command: thus, to love God is a moral or universal obligation,
but to be baptized is positive and obligatory only on those who
believe (Acts 8:37).--Ed.

6. The original edition refers to (Eze 49, 50), but it is evidently
a typographical error in omitting the chapter.

7. Man unaided by revelation.

8. Adam is supposed by some rabbins not to have passed one night
in a state of perfection, (see Ainsworth on Gen 3:1, 28:11; Psa
49:13), and to have fallen on the Sabbath day.

9. The murder of Abel took place 'at the end of days'; see margin
to Genesis 4:3. Properly rendered 'in process of time'; but by some
supposed to mean at the end of the week. See Dr. Gill's Commentary.

10. 'The Lord hath given YOU the sabbath.' See also 31:17, 'It [the
observance of the sabbath] is a sign between me and the children
of Israel for ever.'--Ed.

11. This is a striking application of Colossians 2:17. The sabbath
'a shadow of things to come'; to the Jews it was a shadow of the
rest that remaineth to the children of God, reflected from the
completion of the work of creation. The day of rest and worship
to the Christian, is a much stronger type, yet but a shadow of the
holy enjoyments of his eternal rest, prefigured from the finishing
of the mightier work of redemption.--Ed.

12. In Bunyan's original edition it is 'Matt 3, 1,' but this must
be a typographical error.--Ed.

13. 'Out of doors,' no more to be found, quite gone, fairly sent
away.--Locke. 'Out of court.'--Law-term.--Ed.

14. 'Any likement,' any fondness or partiality.--Ed.

15. This spirit is not extinct. Mr. Shenston, in his 'Plea for the
Seventh-day,' charges those who keep the Lord's day 'that they
yield to the tide--keep their friends--riches--comforts; they
believe that the seventh-day is the sabbath, and would greatly
prefer keeping it, if the rulers of the nation would alter the
day; they imagine that their God is some dumb idol!'+ Language
most unseemly and insulting--charging all who observe the Lord's
day with being hypocrites and the worst of fools. Mr. S. forgot the
solemn proverb, 'with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged.'

+ Edit. 1826, pp. 41, 42.

16. This was the opinion of those great reformers, Tyndale, Calvin,
and Luther; see introduction by the Editor. It was a sentiment
which led to no practical evil.--Ed.

17. Psalm 118:24.

18. 'That we read of' in the New Testament; for this is our sole
authority in all inquiries as to a Christian's faith and practice.--Ed.

19. 'Tradition' is a communication without writing, and when
made orally by some apostle or messenger from the first church
at Jerusalem, and the message so obeys as to be left upon record
by the Holy Ghost, it has the same authority as if it had been
commanded in an epistle. It has nothing to do with the vain traditions
of the fathers (so called), which were not heard of until after the
inspired volume was completed and closed. Any subsequent commands
are censures upon God's omniscience, and are deserving only of
contempt.--Ed.

20. The New Testament by Whittinghan, 1557; the Genevan or Puritan
Bible by Knox, Coverdale, and others, 1560; and the New Testament
revised by Tomson, 1576, very frequently reprinted, and very
favourite translations among our puritan and pilgrim forefathers
in the faith. The marginal note to the Puritan Bible, in Acts
20:7, 'first day,' is, 'which we call Sunday. Of this place, and
also of the 1 Corinthians 16:2, we gather that the Christians
used to have their solemn assemblies this day, laying aside the
ceremony of the Jewish sabbath.'--Ed.

21. 'Acted by,' a mode of speech now obsolete; it means 'actuated
by' or 'influenced by.'--Ed.

***

OF THE TRINITY AND A CHRISTIAN, AND OF THE LAW AND A CHRISTIAN.


EDITOR'S ADVERTISEMENT.

These two short treatises were found among Mr. Bunyan's papers
after his decease. They probably were intended for publication,
like his 'Prison Meditations' and his 'Map of Salvation,' on a
single page each, in the form of a broadside, or handbill. This
was the popular mode in which tracts were distributed; and when
posted against a wall, or framed and hung up in a room, they excited
notice, and were extensively read. They might also have afforded
some trifling profit to aid this poor but eminent servant of
Christ in his very limited income. They form two pages in that
exceedingly interesting volume of 'The Works of Mr. John Bunyan,'
in small folio, 1692. To which is added 'The Struggler,' containing
some most valuable facts, relative to the various works, imprisonment
and sufferings of the author. The titles to these treatises were
added by Mr. Doe, the personal friend of Bunyan, who edited the
works and wrote 'The Struggler,' the author having left them without
any heading or title. They are very unfinished, and may have been
intended as a syllabus or outline of more extended treatises.--GEO.
OFFOR.



OF THE TRINITY AND A CHRISTIAN

How a young, or shaken Christian should demean himself under the
weighty thoughts of the doctrine of the Trinity, or plurality of
persons in the eternal godhead.

The reason why I say a young, or shaken Christian; it is because
some that are not young, but of an ancient standing, may not only
be assaulted with violent temptations, concerning gospel principles,
but a second time may become a child, a babe, a shallow man, in
the things of God; especially, either when by backsliding he hath
provoked God to leave him, or when some new, unexpected, and, as
to present strength, over-weighty objection doth fall upon the
spirit; by means of which, great shakings of mind do commonly
attend such a soul, in the most weighty matters of the concerns
of faith, which this is one that have supposed in the above-named
question. Wherefore passing other things, I will come directly to
that, and briefly propose some helps to a soul in such a case.

THE FIRST PREPARATIVE.

First, then, be sure thou keep close to the word of God; for that
is the revelation of the mind and will of God, both as to the
truth of what is either in himself or ways; and also as to what
he requireth and expecteth of thee, either concerning faith in,
or obedience to, what he hath so revealed. Now for thy better
performing of this I shall give thee in brief these following
directions.

1. Suffer thyself, by the authority of the word, to be persuaded
that the scripture indeed is the word of God; the scriptures of
truth, the words of the holy one; and that they therefore must be
every one true, pure, and for ever settled in heaven.

2. Conclude therefore from the former doctrine, that that God
whose words they are, is able to make a reconciliation and most
sweet and harmonious agreement with all the sayings therein, how
obscure, cross, dark, and contradictory soever they seem to thee.
To understand all mysteries, to have all knowledge, to be able
to comprehend with all saints, is a great work; enough to crush
the spirit, and to stretch the strings of the most capacious and
widened soul that breatheth on this side glory, be they notwithstanding
exceedingly enlarged by revelation. Paul, when he was caught up
to heaven, saw that which was unlawful, because impossible for man
to utter. And saith Christ to the reasoning Pharisee, 'If I have
told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe,
if I tell you of heavenly things?' (John 3:12). It is great lewdness,
and also insufferable arrogancy to come to the word of God, as
conceiting already that whatever thou readest, must either by
thee be understood, or of itself fall to the ground as a senseless
error. But God is wiser than man, wherefore fear thou him, and
tremble at his word, saying still, with godly suspicion of thine
own infirmity, what I see not, teach thou me, and thou art God only
wise; but as for me, 'I was as a beast before thee' (Psa 73:22).

3. Take heed of taking a part of the word only, lest thou thereby
go away with the truth as mangled in pieces. For instance, where
thou readest, 'The LORD our God is one Lord' (Deut 6:4); there
take heed that thou dost not thence conclude, Then there are not
three persons in the godhead: Or when thou readest of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit, then take heed of concluding, there
must therefore either be three Gods, or else that Jesus Christ and
the Holy Ghost are not true God, but the Father only. Wherefore
to help thee here, observe,

THE SECOND PREPARATIVE.

1. That Christian religion requireth credit concerning every
doctrine contained in the word; credit, I say, according to the
true relation of every sentence that the Holy Ghost hath revealed
for the asserting, maintaining, or vindicating that same truth.

2. And therefore hence it is that a Christian is not called a doer,
a reasoner, an objector, and perverse disputer; but a BELIEVER.
Be thou an example to the believer. 'And believers were the more
added to the Lord,' &c. (Acts 5:14; 1 Tim 4:12).

3. Therefore know again that the word, if it saith and expresseth
that this or that is so and so, as to the matter in hand, thou art
bound and obliged both by the name, profession, and the truth,
unto which thou hast joined thyself, to assent to, confess
and acknowledge the same, even then when thy carnal reason will
not stoop thereto. 'Righteous art thou, O Lord,' saith Jeremiah,
'yet let me talk with thee: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked
prosper?' (Jer 12:1). Mark, first he acknowledgeth that God's way
with the wicked is just and right, even then when yet he could
not see the reason of his actings and dispensations towards them.
The same reason is good as to our present case. And hence it
is that the apostle teacheth, the spiritual armour of Christians
should be much exercised against those high-towering and
self-exalting imaginations, that within our own bosoms do exalt
themselves against the knowledge of God. That every thought, or
carnal reasoning, may be not only taken, but brought as captive
into obedience to Christ; that is, be made to stoop to the word of
God, and to give way and place to the doctrine therein contained,
how cross soever our thoughts and the word lie to each other.
And it is observable that he here teacheth, They exalt themselves
against the knowledge of God, which cannot be understood that
our carnal or natural reason doth exalt itself against an eternal
deity, simply considered; for that nature itself doth gather from
the very things that are made, even his eternal power and godhead;
it must be then that they exalt themselves against that God as
thus and thus revealed in the word, to wit, against the knowledge
of one God consisting of three persons, Father, Son, and Spirit;
for this is the doctrine of the scriptures of truth; and therefore
it is observable these thoughts must be brought captive, and be
made subject in particular to the Lord Jesus Christ, as to the
second person in the godhead; for the Father is ever acknowledged
by all that profess the least of religion; but the Son is that
stubmling-stone, and rock of offence, against which thousands dash
themselves in pieces; though in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, and in him dwells the fulness of the godhead
bodily.



OF THE LAW AND A CHRISTIAN.

The law was given twice upon mount Sinai, but the appearance of
the Lord when he gave it the second time, was wonderfully different
from that of his [appearance], when at the first he delivered it
to Israel (Exo 19 and 34).

1. When he gave it the first time, he caused his terror and
severity to appear before Moses, to the shaking of his soul, and
the dismaying of Israel (Exo 19:16; Heb 12:18-20). But when he
gave it the second time, he caused all his goodness to pass before
Moses, to the comfort of his conscience, and the bowing of his
heart (Exo 34:8).

2. When he gave it the first time, it was with thunderings and
lightnings, with blackness and darkness, with flame and smoke, and
a tearing sound of the trumpet (Exo 19:16-18). But when he gave
it the second time, it was with a proclamation of his name to be
merciful, gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgressions
and sins (Exo 34:6,7).

3. When he gave it the first time, Moses was called to go up to
receive it through the fire, which made him exceedingly fear and
quake (Exo 19:18; Heb 12:21). But when he went to receive it the
second time, he was laid in a clift of the rock (Exo 31:22).

4. From all which I gather, that, though as to the matter of the
law, both as to its being given the first time, and the second,
it binds the unbeliever under the pains of eternal damnation, if
he close not with Christ by faith; yet as to the manner of its
giving at these two times, I think the first doth more principally
intend its force as a covenant of works, not at all respecting
the Lord Jesus; but this second time not, at least in the manner
of its being given, respecting such a covenant, but rather as a
rule, or directory, to those who already are found in the clift
of the rock, Christ: for the saint himself, though he be without
law to God, as it is considered the first or old covenant, yet
even he is not without law to him as considered under grace, not
without law to God, but under the law to Christ (1 Cor 9:21).

5. Though therefore it be sad with the unbeliever, because he
only and wholly standeth under the law, as it is given in fire, in
smoke, in blackness, and darkness, and thunder; all which threaten
him with eternal ruin if he fulfil not the utmost tittle thereof;
yet the believer stands to the law under no such consideration,
neither is he so at all to hear or regard it, for he is now
removed from thence to the blessed mountain of Zion, to grace
and forgiveness of sins; he is now, I say, by faith in the Lord
Jesus shrouded under so perfect and blessed a righteousness, that
this thundering law of mount Sinai cannot find the least fault
or diminution therein; but rather approveth and alloweth thereof
either when, or wherever it find it (Heb 12). This is called
the righteousness of God without the law, and is also said to be
witnessed by both the law and the prophets: even the righteousness
of God, which is by faith in Jesus Christ 'unto all and upon all
them that believe, for there is no difference' (Rom 3:22).

6. Wherefore whenever thou who believest in Jesus, dost hear the
law in its thundering and lightning fits, as if it would burn up
heaven and earth; then say thou, I am freed from this law, these
thunderings have nothing to do with my soul; nay even this law, while
it thus thunders and roareth, it doth both allow and approve of
my righteousness. I know that Hagar would sometimes be domineering
and high, even in Sarah's house and against her; but this she
is not to be suffered to do, nay though Sarah herself be barren;
wherefore serve IT also as Sarah served her, and expel her out
from thy house. My meaning is, when this law with its thundering
threatenings doth attempt to lay hold on thy conscience, shut it
out with a promise of grace; cry, the inn is took up already, the
Lord Jesus is here entertained, and here is no room for the law.
Indeed if it will be content with being my informer, and so lovingly
leave off to judge me; I will be content, it shall be in my sight,
I will also delight therein; but otherwise, I being now made
upright without it, and that too with that righteousness, which
this law speaks well of and approveth; I am not, will not, cannot,
dare not make it my saviour and judge, nor suffer it to set up its
government in my conscience; for by so doing I fall from grace,
and Christ Jesus doth profit me nothing (Gal 5:1-5).

7. Thus therefore the soul that is married to him that is raised
up from the dead, both may and ought to deal with this law of
God; yea, it doth greatly dishonour its Lord and refuse its gospel
privileges, if it at any time otherwise doth, whatever it seeth
or feels. The law hath power over the wife so long as her husband
liveth, but if her husband be dead she is freed from that law,
so that she is no adulteress though she be married to another man
(Rom 7:1-3). Indeed so long as thou art alive to sin, and to thy
righteousness which is of the law, so long thou hast them for thy
husband and they must reign over thee: But when once they are
become dead unto thee, as they then most certainly will, when
thou closest with the Lord Jesus Christ; then I say, thy former
husbands have no more to meddle with thee, thou art freed from
their law. Set a case, a woman be cast into prison for a debt of
hundreds of pounds, if after this she marry; yea, though while
she is in the gaoler's hand, in the same day that she is joined
to her husband, her debt is all become his; yea, and the law also
that arrested and imprisoned this woman, as freely tells her, go,
she is freed, saith Paul, from that, and so saith the law of this
land.

The sum then of what hath been said is this, the Christian hath
now nothing to do with the law, as it thundereth and burneth on
Sinai, or as it bindeth the conscience to wrath and the displeasure
of God for sin; for from its thus appearing, it is freed by faith
in Christ. Yet it is to have regard thereto, and is to count it
holy, just and good (Rom 7:12); which that it may do, it is always
whenever it seeth or regards it, to remember that he who giveth
it to us is 'merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant
in goodness and truth,' &c. (Exo 34:6).

***

SCRIPTURAL POEMS; BEING SEVERAL PORTIONS OF SCRIPTURE DIGESTED INTO
ENGLISH VERSE

viz.,

I. The Book of Ruth II. The History of Samson III. Christ's Sermon
on the Mount IV. The Prophecy of Jonah V. The Life of Joseph VI.
The Epistle of James

BY JOHN BUNYAN

Licensed According to Order.

London: Printed for J. Blare, at the Looking Glass, on London
Bridge, 1701.


ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

This very interesting little volume of poems, we believe, has not
been reprinted since the year 1701, nor has it ever been inserted
in any edition or catalogue of Bunyan's works. This may have arisen
from the author's having sold his entire copyright--a fact which
prevented Charles Doe from publishing many other of Bunyan's
treatises, when he projected his edition of the entire works,
of which the first volume only was printed. With some other of
Bunyan's rarest tracts, it escaped the researches of Wilson, who
published the works in 1737, and also of Whitefield, Mason, and all
other editors of Bunyan's works. Mr. Doe, in his very interesting
pages called 'The Struggler, for the Preservation of Mr. John
Bunyan's Labours,' gives a catalogue table of his books in the
order in which they were published; but he had not discovered these
poems, nor the Emblems, nor the Exhortation to Peace and Unity.

The volume from which this edition is printed consists of one
hundred pages in crown octavo, with a very rude cut of Ruth and
Boaz. It is of extreme rarity, if not unique, in a perfect state.
The imprint is--London, for J. Blare, at the Looking Glass, on London
Bridge, 1701. It forms part of the Editor's extensive collection
of the original or early editions of Bunyan's tracts and treatises;
the scarcity of which may be accounted for, from their having been
printed on very bad paper, and worn out by use, being so generally
and eagerly read by pious persons among the labouring classes of
the community.

The style and substance of these scriptural poems are entirely
Bunyan's. His veneration for the holy oracles appears through
every page, by his close adherence to the text. He fully proves
what he asserts in his address to the reader--


'The WORD are for the most part all the same,
For I affected plainness more than fame.'


However uncouth it may appear to use a plural verb after a singular
noun, it really expresses his meaning, which is evidently, that
portions of the WORD of God are rendered into poetry as nearly
as possible, word for word with the original; and he immediately
apologizes for this rudeness, in neglecting the rules of grammar,
by stating his earnest plainness of speech, and his want of
education in early life.


'Nor could'st thou hope to have it better done,
For I'm no poet, nor a poet's son,
But a mechanic, guided by no rule,
But what I gained in a grammar school
In my minority.'


How exactly does this agree with his account of himself in
boyhood,--'It pleased God to put it into my parent's heart to put
me to school, to learn both to read and write; though, to my shame
I confess, I did soon lose that I learnt, even almost utterly.'[1]

Our surprise will be excited, not by little inaccuracies of style
or departures from the rules of grammar, but at the talent of a
poor mechanic, in so faithfully rendering scripture histories in
such simple and striking language. As Mr. Burton says, in commending
his Gospel Truths Vindicated,--'This man hath not the learning or
wisdom of man, yet through grace he hath received the teaching of
God, and the learning of the Spirit of Christ, which is the thing
that makes a man both a Christian and a minister of the gospel
(Isa 50:4). He was not chosen out of an earthly, but out of the
heavenly University, and hath taken these three heavenly degrees--Union
with Christ--The Anointing of the Spirit, and Experience of the
Temptations of Satan; far better than all the University learning
and degrees that can be had.' May Bunyan's desire be realized,
and his verses prove to all our readers


'As delighting
To thee in reading, as to me in writing.'


GEO. OFFOR.

Hackney, August 22, 1849



SCRIPTURAL POEMS


TO THE READER.

Whoe'er thou art that shall peruse this book,
This may inform thee, when I undertook
To write these lines, it was not my design
To publish this imperfect work of mine:
Composed only for diversion's sake.
But being inclin'd to think thou may'st partake
Some benefit thereby, I have thought fit,
Imperfect as it is, to publish it.
The subjects are a part of the contents,
Both of the Old and the New Testaments;
The word are for the most part all the same,
For I affected plainness more than fame.
Nor could'st thou hope to have it better done:
For I'm no poet, nor a poet's son,
But a mechanic, guided by no rule,
But what I gained in a grammar school
In my minority: I can't commend it,
Such as it is into the world I send it,
And should be glad to see some hand to mend it.
Would but those men whose genius leads them to't,
And who have time and parts wherewith to do't,
Employ their pens in such a task as this,
'Twould be a most delightsome exercise
Of profit to themselves and others too:
If what the learned Herbert says, holds true,
A verse may find him, who a sermon flies,
And turn delight into a sacrifice;[2]
Thus I conclude, and wish it as delighting
To thee in reading as to me in writing.

JOHN BUNYAN.



THE BOOK OF RUTH

A VERY RUDE WOODCUT:--RUTH GLEANING.--RUTH CREEPING TO BOAZ,
WHO IS ASLEEP.

CHAP. I.

In ancient times, e'er Israel knew the way
Of kingly power, when judges bore the sway:
A certain man of Bethlehem Juda fled,
By reason of a famine that o'erspread
The land, into the land of Moab, where
He and his wife, and sons, sojourners were.
His name Elimelech, his eldest son
Was called Mahlon, t'other Chilion,
His wife was Naomi, Ephrathites they were:
They went to Moab and continued there:
Where of her husband Naomi was bereft,
And only she and her two sons were left:
Who took them wives of Moab in their youth.
The name of one was Orpah, t'other Ruth:
And there they died ere twice five years were gone;
And Naomi was wholly left alone.
Then she arose, and her step-daughters with her,
To leave the land of Moab altogether:
For she had heard the Lord had visited
Her native country, with increase of bread,
Wherefore the land of Moab she forsook,
And to her native place her course she took,
Her daughters with her: whom she did desire,
That to their mother's house they would retire.
The Lord, said she, be kind to you again,
As you to me, and to the dead have been.
God grant you each may be with husbands blest,
And in the enjoyment of them both find rest,
Then she embraced them, and there withal,
Down from their cheeks, the tears began to fall.
They wept aloud, and said, Most surely we
Unto thy people will return with thee.
But Naomi replied, Wherefore will ye,
My daughters, thus resolve to go with me?
Are there yet any more sons in my womb,
That may your husbands be in time to come?
Return again, my daughters, go your way,
For I'm too old to marry: should I say
I've hope? Should I this night conceive a son?
Would either of you stay till he is grown?
Would you so long without an husband[3] live?
Nay, nay, my daughters, for it doth me grieve
Exceedingly, even for your sakes, that I
Do under this so great affliction lie.
And here they wept again. And Orpah kiss'd
Her mother, But Ruth would be not dismiss'd
But clave unto her: unto whom she spake
And said, Behold, thy sister is gone back,
With her own gods, and people to abide,
Go thou along with her. But Ruth replied,
Intreat me not to leave thee, or return:
For where thou goest, I'll go, where thou sojourn,
I'll sojourn also. And what people's thine,
And who thy God, the same shall both be mine.
Where thou shalt die, there will I die likewise,
And I'll be buried where thy body lies.
The Lord do so to me, and more, if I
Do leave thee, or forsake thee till I die.
And when she saw the purpose of her heart,
She left off to desire her to depart.
So they two travelled along together
To Bethlehem, and when they were come thither,
Behold! the people were surprised, and cried,
What, is this Naomi? But she replied,
Oh! call me Mara, and not Naomi;
For I have been afflicted bitterly.
I went out from you full, but now I come,
As it hath pleased God, quite empty home:
Why then call ye me Naomi? Since I
Have been afflicted so exceedingly.
So Naomi return'd, and Ruth together,
Who had come from the land of Moab with her:
And unto Bethlem Judah did they come,
Just as the Barley Harvest was begun.

CHAP. II.

There was a man of kin to Naomi,
One that was of her husband's family,
His name was Boaz, and his wealth was great.
And Ruth, the Moabitess, did intreat
Her Mother's leave, that she might go, and gather
Some ears of corn, where she should most find favour:
Go, daughter, go, said she. She went and came
Near to the reapers, to glean after them:
And lo, it was her hap to light among
The reapers, which to Boaz did belong.
Behold, now Boaz came from Bethlehem
Unto his reapers, and saluted them,
And they bless'd him again: and he enquired
Of him that was set over them he hired,
From whence the damsel was, and was inform'd
She was the Moabitess that return'd
With Naomi: and she did ask, said he,
That here amongst the reapers she might be,
And that she might have liberty to glean
Among the sheaves. And she all day hath been,
Ev'n from the morning until now, with us,
That she hath stay'd a little in the house.
Then Boaz said to Ruth, observe, my daughter,
That thou go not from hence, or follow after
The reapers of another field, but where
My maidens are, see that thou tarry there:
Observe what field they reap, and go thou there,
Have I not charged the young men to forbear
To touch thee? And when thou dost thirst, approach
And drink of what the youths have set abroach.[4]
Then she fell on her face, and to the ground
She bow'd herself, and said, Why have I found
Such favour in thine eyes; that thou, to me
Who am a stranger, should so courteous be?
And Boaz said, it hath been fully shewn
To me, what to thy mother-in-law thou'st done,
Since of thine husband thou hast been bereft:
How thou thy father and thy mother left,
And thine own native land; to come unto
A land which thou before didst never know:
The Lord, the God of Israel, the defence
Whom now thou'st chosen, be thy recompence.
Then said she, let me in thy sight, my lord,
Find favour in that thou dost thus afford
Me comfort, and since thou so kind to me
Dost speak, though I thereof unworthy be.
And Boaz said, at meal time come thou near,
Eat of the bread, and dip i' th' vinegar.
And by the reapers she sat down to meat,
He gave her parched corn, and she did eat,
And was suffic'd; and left, and rose to glean:
And Boaz gave command to the young men,
Let her come in among the sheaves, said he,
To glean, and let her not reproached be.
Let fall some handfuls also purposely,
And let her take them without injury.
So she till even glean'd, and then beat out
Her barley, being an ephah[5] or thereabout.
She took it up, and to the city went,
And to her mother-in-law did it present:
And what she had reserv'd to her she gave,
When she had took what she design'd to have.
Then unto her, her mother-in-law did say,
In what field hast thou been to glean to-day?
And where hast thou been working? Blest be he,
That thus hath taken cognizance of thee.
She told with whom, and furthermore did say,
The man's name's Boaz, where I wrought to-day.
And Naomi replied, may he be blest,
Even of the Lord, whose kindness manifest
Unto the living and the dead hath been:
The man's our kinsman, yea, the next of kin.
And Ruth, the Moabitess, said, he gave
Me likewise a commandment not to leave,
Or to depart from following his young men,
Until they had brought all his harvest in.
And Naomi said unto Ruth, my daughter,
'Tis good that thou observe to follow after
His maidens, that they meet thee not elsewhere.
So she to Boaz's maidens still kept near,
Till barley and wheat harvest both, she saw
Were done, and she dwelt with her mother-in-law.

CHAP. III.

Then Naomi said, Shall I not, my daughter,
Seek rest for thee, that thou do well hereafter?
And is not Boaz, with whose maids thou wast,
One of the nearest kinsmen that thou hast?
Behold, this night he in his threshing floor
Is winnowing Barley, wash thyself therefore,
Anoint thee, put thy clothes on, and get down
Unto the floor; but make not thyself known,
Till he hath eat and drank, and shall prepare
To lie him down; then take good notice where
He goes about to take his night's repose,
And go thou in there, and lift up the clothes
From off his feet, and likewise lay thee down,
And what thou hast to do he will make known.
And she made answer, Whatsoever thou
Hast me commanded, will I gladly do.
And down unto the floor she hasted, and
Forthwith fulfilled her mother-in-law's command.
So now when Boaz had his heart refresh'd,
With meat and drink, he laid him down to rest,
Near to the heap of corn; she softly came,
Uncover'd's feet, and lay down by the same.
And, lo! at midnight, as he turn'd him round,
He was afraid, for at his feet he found
A woman lay. Who art thou? then said he.
I am thine handmaid Ruth, replied she,
Over thine handmaid therefore spread thy skirt,
I pray, because thou a near kinsman art.
Blessed be thou, said he, because thou hast
Made manifest more kindness at the last,
Than at the first, in that thou did'st, my daughter,
No young men, whether poor or rich, go after.
And now, my daughter, be not thou afraid,
I will do to thee all that thou hast said:
For all the city of my people knows,
Thou art a woman truly virtuous;
And now though I am kin and undoubtedly,
Yet there is one that's nearer kin than I.
Tarry this night, and when 'tis morning light,
If he will like a kinsman, do thee right,
We'll let him, but if not, I myself will,
As the Lord lives; till morning lie thou still.
And till the morning at his feet she lay,
And then arose about the break of day;
And he gave her a charge, not to declare
That there had any womankind been there.
He also said, bring here thy veil, and hold
To me; she did, and thereinto he told
Six measures full of barley, and did lay
It on her, and she hasted thence away.
And when unto her mother-in-law she came,
Art thou, said she, my daughter come again?
Then what the man had done she told, and said,
He these six measures full of barley laid
Upon me, for said he, This I bestow,
Lest to thy mother thou should'st empty go.
Then, said she, sit still daughter, till thou see
What the event of this intrigue will be;
For till the man this day hath made an end,
No satisfaction will on him attend.

CHAP. IV.

And Boaz went up to the city gate,
And after a short space, while there he sate,
The kinsman of whom he had spoke, came by,
To whom he said, Ho,[6] such a one, draw nigh,
And sit down here. He came and sat him down.
Then he took ten men, elders of the town,
And caused them to sit down. Then to the man
That was of kin, thus he his speech began,
Naomi, said he, who not long since sojourn'd
Among the Moabites, is now return'd;
And doth intend to sell a piece of ground,
The which Elimelech our brother own'd.
And now to give thee notice, I thought fit,
That if thou pleasest, thou may'st purchase it.
In presence of these men assembled here.
Then if thou wilt redeem it, now declare
Thy mind, but if thou wilt not, then let me,
For thou art next of kin, and I next thee.
Then said the kinsman, I will it redeem.
Boaz reply'd, if good to thee it seem,
To buy it of the hand of Naomi,
Thou also art obliged the same to buy
Of Ruth the Moabitess, wife o' th' dead;
On his inheritance to raise up seed.
The kinsman said, I cannot do this thing
Myself, lest I an inconvenience bring
Upon mine own inheritance, what's mine
By right, therefore I now to thee resign.
Now this in Israel did a custom stand,
Concerning changing and redeeming land;
To put all controversy to an end,
A man pluck'd off his shoe, and gave his friend;
And this in Israel was an evidence,
When e'er they changed an inheritance.
Then said the kinsman unto Boaz, do
Thou take my right. And off he pluck'd his shoe.
Then Boaz to the elders thus did say
And to the people, all of you this day
Appear for me as witnesses, that I
Have bought all of the land of Naomi,
That was Elimelech's or did belong
Either to Mahlon or to Chilion:
And Ruth the Moabitess, who some time
Was Mahlon's wife, I've purchas'd to be mine,
Still to preserve alive the dead man's name
On his inheritance, lest that the same
Should in the gate where he inhabited,
Or 'mongst his brethren be extinguished:
Behold, this day, my witnesses you are.
Then all the people that were present there,
And elders said, We are thy witnesses:
May God this woman thou hast taken bless,
That she, like Rachel, and like Leah be,
Which two did build up Israel's family:
And thou in Ephratah exalt thy name,
And through the town of Bethl'hem spread thy fame;
And may the seed which God shall give to thee
Of this young woman, full as prosperous be,
As was the house of Pharez heretofore,
(Pharez, whom Tamar unto Judah bore.)
So he took Ruth, and as his wife he knew her,
And God was pleased, when he went in to her
To grant the blessing of conception,
And she accordingly bare him a son.
Then said the woman, Blessed be the Lord!
Bless thou him Naomi, who doth afford
To thee this day a kinsman, which shall be
Famous in Israel; and shall be to thee
As the restorer of thy life again,
And in thy drooping age shall thee sustain:
For that thy daughter-in-law, who loves thee well
And in thy sight doth seven sons excel,
Hath born this child. Then Naomi took the boy
To nurse; and did him in her bosom lay.
Her neighbours too, gave him a name, for why,
This son, say they, is born to Naomi:
They called him Obed, from whose loins did spring
Jesse, the sire of David, Israel's king.



THE HISTORY OF SAMSON

JUDGES, CHAP. XIII.

When Israel's sins th' Almighty did provoke,
To make them subject to Philistine yoke
For forty years: in Zorah dwelt a man,
His name Manoah, of the tribe of Dan;
His wife was barren, unto whom appeared
The angel of the Lord, and thus declared:
Though thou, said he, art barren, time shall come
Thou shalt enjoy the blessing of thy womb;
Now therefore I entreat thee to refrain
From wine, strong drink, and things that are unclean,
For lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son,
Upon whose head there shall no razor come:
For he to God a Nazarite shall be,
And shall begin to set his people free
From the Philistine yoke. The woman came
And told her husband, she had seen a man
Of God: his dreadful look made me, said she,
Think him an angel of the Lord to be:
But I inquired not from whence he came,
Neither did he make known to me his name:
But thus he said, Thou shalt conceive a son;
Wherefore strong drink and wine, see that thou shun,
And have a care that thou be not defil'd
With things that are unclean; for why, the child
Shall from his separation from the womb,
Become a Nazarite, ev'n to his tomb.
Manoah then did supplicate the Lord,
And said, O Lord, be pleased to afford
This favour unto me, to send again
The man of God, more fully to explain
Thy will to us, that we may rightly know,
When this child shall be born, what we must do.
And to Manoah's prayer God gave ear,
And to his wife the angel did appear
Again, as she did in the field retire,
At such time as her husband was not nigh her.
And she made haste, and ran, and strait declared
Unto her husband, that the man appeared
Again, whom she had seen the other day.
Manoah then arose, and went his way,
And when he came, he said, Art thou the man
That spakest to my wife? He said, I am.
Manoah said, Now let thy words be true;
How shall we use the child, What must we do?
Then said the angel of the Lord, let her
Of all that I have charged her beware:
She may not taste of what comes of the vine,
Nor may she drink strong drink, or any wine,
Nor may she eat of things that are unclean,
From all that I have said let her refrain.
Manoah said unto the angel, stay
With us, till we have dress'd a kid, I pray.
But he reply'd, though thou shalt me detain,
I'll eat no bread, but if thou dost design
A sacrifice unto the Lord, then offer:
For ne'er till now, Manoah did discover
It was a man of God he spake unto.
Then said he to the angel, Let me know
Thy name, that when these things shall be perform'd,
The honour due to thee may be return'd.
Whereto the man of God made this reply,
Why askest thou, since 'tis a mystery?
So he a kid, and a meat-off'ring took,
And offer'd to the Lord upon a rock.
And there the man of God did wond'rously,
The whilst Manoah and his wife stood by:
For as the altar did send up the flame,
The man of God ascended in the same.
Manoah and his wife stood looking on,
And on their faces to the ground fell down.
But then the angel did appear no more.
Manoah then knew who he was: therefore
He said unto his wife, most surely we
Shall die, for we the face of God did see.
But she reply'd, If God would such a thing,
He would not now accept our offering,
Or would he have to us these things made known;
Or told us, as at this time he hath done.
And now, according to the angel's word,
The woman bare a son, to whom the Lord
Was pleas'd, his blessing graciously to give:
She call'd him Samson, and the child did thrive.
And lo! the spirit of the Lord began,
At times to move him in the camp of Dan.

CHAP. XIV.

Now down to Timnath Samson's steps incline,
Where seeing the daughter of a Philistine,
He came up and did of his parents crave,
That he in marriage might the woman have.
Then thus his father and his mother said,
'Mongst all thy kin can'st thou find ne'er a maid;
Nor yet among my people, fit to make
A wife, but thou wilt this Philistine take,
Of race uncircumcised? He replied,
Get her for me, for I'm well satisfied.
But neither of his parents then did know,
It was the Lord that moved him thereto,
To seek a way to accomplish his designs,
Upon the then o'er-ruling Philistines.
Then Samson and his parents both went down
To Timnath, and as they came near the town,
Among the vineyards a young lion roar'd:
Then on him came the spirit of the Lord,
And though unarm'd, he rent him like a kid,
But he discovered not to them the deed.
And he went down, and with the woman treated,
And was well pleas'd to have the match completed.
And in a while as he returned again
To take his wife, behold, where he had slain
The beast, he there a swarm of bees set eye on,
And honey in the carcase of the lion:
He took thereof, and eating, on he went,
And to his parents did a part present:
And they did also eat, but did not know
That from the lion's carcase it did flow.
So down his father went unto the woman,
And Samson made a feast, as it was common
Among young men. The Philistines provide
Thirty companions with him to abide
And Samson said unto them, now behold,
I have a riddle for you to unfold;
Which if you do before the seven days' feast
Be ended, I will give to every guest
A sheet and change of garments; but if ye
Cannot declare it, ye shall give to me
Full thirty sheets, and thirty changes too.
Then said they, What's thy riddle, let us know?
And Samson said, The eater sent forth meat,
And from the strong there came a thing most sweet.
And they could not in three days find it out,
Wherefore before the seventh came about,
They said unto his wife, Thou must entice
Thy husband to discover this device
Lest we burn thee, and all thy father's house:
Is it not so, that ye have called us
To make a spoil? And Samson's wife wept sore,
And said, thou dost but hate me, and no more;
To put a riddle to my countrymen
And not tell't me. And he reply'd again,
I have not told my father or my mother,
And shall I now to thee this thing discover.
And she continually before him wept,
During the time the feasting days were kept.
And now behold it came to pass that he,
By reason of her importunity,
Did on the seventh day to her unfold
The riddle, which she to her brethren told;
And e'er the sun went down on that same day,
The Philistines to Samson thus did say,
What is more sweet than honey? What more strong
Than is a lion? And he said, how long
Would it have been, e'er you had understood
This thing, had you not with my heifer plow'd?
Then came the spirit of the Lord upon
Him, and he hasted down to Askelon,
And thirty of the Philistines he slew,
And took their clothes, and gave the garments due.
To every one of them that had disclosed
The meaning of the riddle he proposed;
And towards them his anger fiercely burned,
And he unto his father's house returned.
But Samson's wife was given unto one
That was his friend and chief companion.

CHAP. XV.

But in a while, as Samson visited
His wife, in the wheat harvest with a kid,
To her into her chamber he would go,
The which her father would not let him do;
But said, I thought that thou had'st quite forsook her,
Wherefore I gave consent, and thy friend took her;
Doth not her sister's beauty her's exceed,
Though young? I pray then take her in her stead.
And Samson said, I shall more blameless be
Than they, though I shall do them injury.
And then he caught three hundred foxes, and
Turn'd tail to tail, and put a fiery brand
Between two tails, and setting fire thereto,
Into the standing corn he let them go,
And burnt both shocks and standing corn and vines,
And all the olives of the Philistines.
Then they inquired who this thing had done,
And were inform'd it was the Timnite's son;
Because his father took his wife away,
And gave her his companion to enjoy.
And the Philistines came up, full of wrath,
And burnt with fire, her and her father both.
And Samson said, though you have done this thing,
A further evil I will on you bring;
And my avenging hand shall cease hereafter;
And hip and thigh he smote them with great slaughter.
And he return'd, and came up to the top
Of Etam, and dwelt there upon the rock.
Then the Philistines up to Judah went,
And in the vale of Lehi pitched their tent.
Then said the men of Judah, for what reason
Are you come up against us at this season?
And they made answer, We are come to bind
Samson, to do to him in the same kind
As he hath done to us. Then there went up
Three thousand men of Judah to the top
Of the rock Etam, and to Samson said,
Dost thou not know that we have long obey'd
The Philistines? Wherefore is it that thou
Hast done this thing, to bring this evil now,
Upon us, let us know it? Then said he
I did to them as they have done to me.
Then said they we are come, and have brought bands,
To bind, and give thee up into their hands.
And he made answer, you shall swear unto me,
That you yourselves no injury will do me.
And they reply'd, no no, we will but bind thee,
We will not kill thee, but to them resign thee.
And they took two new cords, and therewith tied him,
And from the rock where he abode convey him:
Whom when they to the camp at Lehi brought,
The Philistines against him gave a shout:
And mightily the Spirit of the Lord
Came on him, and like burning flax each cord
That was upon his arms became; the bands
Were likewise separated from his hands.
And he the jaw-bone of an ass espied,
And took and smote them till a thousand died.
Then said he, with an ass's jaw-bone I
Have made mine enemies in heaps to lie.
Behold I have destroy'd a thousand men
With this same worthless ass's jaw. And when
He made an end to speak, it came to pass
He cast away the jaw-bone of the ass,
And said, Now let the place where this was done
Be by the name of Ramath-Lehi known.
And he was sore athirst, and to the Lord
He cried, and said, O Lord, thou did'st afford
This great deliverance, and now shall I,
By reason of my thirst fall down and die,
And fall into the most accursed hands
Of these uncircumcis'd Philistine bands?
But God was pleas'd to cleave an hollow place,
Within the jaw, from whence did water pass;
Whereof when he had drunk, his spirit came
As heretofore, and he reviv'd again:
Wherefore that place, which is in Lehi, bore
Unto this day the name of En-hakkore.
And in the days the Philistines bore sway,
Israel for twenty years did him obey.

CHAP. XVI.

Then down to Gaza Samson went, and there
Seeing an harlot, went in unto her.
And when the Gazites heard he was come thither:
Straightway they gathered themselves together
To compass him about, and lay in wait
All night, to take him in the city gate;
And they were still all night, for why? Say they,
To-morrow we shall kill him when 'tis day.
And he till midnight lay, and then arose,
And with the city gates away he goes,
Bearing the posts and bar and all away,
And on an hill near Hebron did them lay.
And afterward it came to pass he saw,
And lov'd a woman named Delilah,
Who in the vale of Sorek dwelt, to whom
There did the lords of the Philistines come,
And said, If thou wilt but entice him to reveal
Where lies his strength, and which way we may deal
With him, to bind him, to afflict him, we
Each one will give a great reward to thee.
And she to Samson said, I pray thee, tell
Wherein thy strength doth other men excel,
And how thou may'st be bound. And he replied,
If they with seven green withs that ne'er were dried,
Shall bind me hand and foot, I shall be then
As weak and impotent as other men.
Then the Philistine lords for her provide
The seven green withs which never had been dried,
And she therewith did bind him, (now there were
Men lying in wait whom she had placed there,)
Then she cried out, and said, Now Samson stand
Thy ground, for the Philistines are at hand.
And straight he brake the withs, and they became
Like to a thread of tow when touch'd with flame:
So was his strength not found out. Then said she,
Samson, behold, thou hast deceived me,
And told me lies: therefore no longer blind me,
But tell, I pray thee, wherewith I may bind thee.
Bind me with ropes that ne'er were us'd, said he;
Then weak as other men are, shall I be.
She therefore took new ropes, and bound him, and
Cried, Samson, the Philistines are at hand:
(And in the chamber there were man lay hid)
And from his arms he brake them like a thread.
Then said she, Thou hast mocked me hitherto,
And told me lies: now tell me what to do
To bind thee. He replied, Thou with the web
Must interweave the seven locks of my head.
Then she his locks did fasten with the pin,
And said, The Philistines are coming in,
Shift, Samson, for thyself; then he awoke,
And pin and web, and all away he took.
Then said she, How canst thou pretend to love me,
When thus thy doing towards me disprove thee?
For now, behold, thou hast deceived me thrice,
And hast not told me where thy great strength lies.
At length his soul being vex'd exceedingly,
By reason of her importunity:
He told the secrets of his heart, and said,
Never yet razor on my head was laid;
For I have been to God a Nazarite,
Even from the day that first I saw the light:
Wherefore like other men, if I am shaven,
I shall be weak, and of my strength bereaven.
And when she saw that he had told her all
The secrets of his heart, she sent to call
The lords of the Philistines. Come, said she,
This once, for now he hath made known to me
The very truth. Then they came up together,
And brought the money in their hands to give her.
Then down to sleep upon her knees she laid him,
And call'd a man, who of his locks betray'd him.
And to afflict him she began, and then
His strength became like that of other men.
Then said she, Samson, thy Philistine foes
Are just at hand: and he from sleep arose,
And as at other times went forth to shake him,
Not knowing that the Lord did now forsake him.
But the Philistines seized him, and brought
Him down to Gaza, having first put out
His eyes, and did with brazen fetters bind
And made him in the prison house to grind.
Howbeit the hair upon his head began,
After he had been shaved, to grow again.
Then the Philistine lords together met,
And a thanksigivng-day apart they set,
For to rejoice, and unto Dagon pay
Their highest service; For our God, say they,
Did this: and when the people did behold
Poor captive Samson, they their god extoll'd,
And said, Our God hath given into our hand
Him that destroy'd us, and laid waste our land.
And in their height of mirth they sent to call
Samson, to come and make sport for them all.
And from the prison-house they brought him, and
Between the pillars they set him to stand;
And there he made them sport. Then to the lad
That led him by the hand, thus Samson said;
Let me now feel the pillars that sustain
The house, that I myself thereon may lean.
Now in the house there was a mighty throng
Of men and women gather'd, and among
Them, all the lords of the Philistines were.
Besides, upon the roof there did appear,
About three thousand men and women, who
Beheld, while Samson made them sport below.
And Samson, calling on the Lord, did say,
O Lord, my God, remember me, I pray,
This once give strength, that I aveng'd may be
Of those Philistines who have blinded me.
And with his right hand and his left, he held
Two middle pillars which the house upheld;
And said, Let me with the Philistines die,
And then he bowed himself most mightily:
And down the house fell on the lords, and all
The people that were in't; so that the fall
Thereof, slew at his dying many more
Than he had slain in all his life before.
Then did his brethren and his kinfolks come
And took him up, and brought him with them home,
And laid him in his father's sepulchre,
When he had judged Israel twenty year.



CHRIST'S SERMON ON THE MOUNT

MATTHEW, CHAP. V.

And Jesus, seeing the multitudes, ascended
Up to a mount, where sitting, and attended
By his disciples, he began to preach;
And on this manner following did them teach.
Blessed are all such as are poor in spirit,
For they the heavenly kingdom do inherit.
Blessed are they that mourn; for in the stead
Thereof shall comfort be administered.
Blessed are they, whose meekness doth excel:
For on the earth their portion is to dwell.
Blessed are they, who after righteousness
Hunger and thirst; for they shall it possess.
Blessed are they, for they shall mercy find,
Who to do mercifully are inclin'd.
Blessed are all such as are pure in heart;
For God his presence shall to them impart.
Blessed are they that do make peace; for why?
They shall be call'd the sons of the Most High.
Blessed are they which suffer for the sake
Of righteousness: for they of heav'n partake.
Blessed are ye, when men shall falsely speak
All kind of ill against you for my sake,
And shall revile, and persecute you sore;
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad therefore:
For your reward in heav'n will be great:
For thus of old they did the prophets treat.
Ye are the salt o' th' earth; but wherewith must
The earth be season'd when the savour's lost?
It is from thenceforth good for nothing, but
To be cast out, and trodd'n under foot.
Ye are the light o' th' world; a city set
Upon an hill cannot be hid; nor yet
Do men a candle with a bushel cover,
But set it where it lights the whole house over.
So shine your light, your good works seen thereby
Men may your heavenly Father glorify.
Think not that to destroy the law I came,
Or prophets; no, but to fulfil the same.
For till the heav'n and earth shall pass away,
One jot or tittle from the law, I say,
Shall never pass, till all shall be complete.
Whoso therefore presumes to violate,
One of these least commands, and teacheth so,
Shall in God's kingdom be accounted low.
But he that doth, and teacheth them likewise,
Shall in God's kingdom have great dignities.
For I declare unto you, that unless
You shall exceed the scribe and pharisees
In righteousness; you shall on no condition,
Into the heavenly kingdom gain admission.
Ye've heard 'twas said of old, 'Thou shalt not kill.'
And he incurs the judgment who shall spill
His brother's blood: but I to you declare,
That he that's wroth without a cause, shall bear
The judgment. Likewise of the council he
That sayeth 'racha' shall in danger be.
But whosoe'er shall say, Thou fool, the same
Shall be in danger of eternal flame.
When therefore to the altar thou dost bring
Thy gift, and there rememb'rest any thing
Thy brother hath against thee: leave it there
Before the altar, and come thou not near,
Till thou hast first made reconciliation,
Then may'st thou come and offer thine oblation.
Make an agreement with thine adversary
Whilst thou art in the way, and do not tarry;
Lest he at any time deliver thee
Unto the judge, and by the judge thou be
Unto the officer forthwith resign'd,
And in imprisonment thou be confin'd;
I do affirm thou shalt not be enlarg'd,
Till thou the utmost farthing hast discharg'd.
Ye've heard that they of old did testify,
That men should not commit adultery:
But I pronounce him an adulterer,
Who views a woman to lust after her.
And if thy right eye shall offensive be,
Pluck thou it out and cast the same from thee;
For it is better lose one, than that all
Thy members should into hell torments fall.
And if thy right hand doth offend, cut off it,
And cast it from thee, for it will thee profit
Much rather that one of thy members fell,
Than that they should be all condemned to hell.
It hath been said, whoso away shall force
His wife, shall give her a bill of divorce:
But whosoe'er shall put his wife away,
Except for fornication's sake, I say,
Makes her adult'ress, and who marries her,
So put away, is an adulterer.
Again: Ye've heard, Thou shalt not be forsworn,
Was ancient doctrine, but thou shalt perform
Unto the Lord thine oaths: But I declare,
That thou shalt not at all presume to swear;
Neither by heaven, for it is God's throne;
Nor by the earth, for his foot stands thereon:
Neither swear by Jerusalem, for why?
It is the city of the King Most High:
Nor swear thou by thine head, for thou canst make
No hair thereof to be or white or black:
But let yea, yea; nay, nay, in speech suffice,
For what is more from evil doth arise.
Ye've heard, it hath been said; Eye for an eye,
And tooth for tooth: But I do testify,
That you shall not resist; but let him smite
Thy left cheek also, who assaults thy right.
And if that any by a lawsuit shall
Demand thy coat, let them have cloak and all.
And whosoe'er compelleth thee to go
A mile, refuse not to go with him two.
Give him that asketh, and from him that may
Have need to borrow, turn not thou away.
Ye've heard, 'twas said: That thou shalt love thy friend
And hate thy foe: But let your love extend
Unto your enemies: thus I declare,
Bless them that curse, do good to them that bear
Ill will, and for your persecutors pray,
And them that do reproach you; that you may
Be children of your Father that's in heaven;
For he on good and bad alike hath given
His sun to rise, and in like manner doth
Send rain upon the just and unjust both
For what is your reward, if you love them
That love you? Do not publicans the same?
And if your brethren only you salute,
What more than they do ye? They also do't.
I will therefore that you be perfect, ev'n
As is your Father perfect that's in heaven.

CHAP. VI.

Take heed you do not your alms-deed bestow
Before men, purposely to make a shew;
For then there will no recompence be given
Unto you of your Father that's in heaven:
With sound of trumpet do not thou therefore
Proclaim what thou art giving to the poor;
As is the manner of the hypocrites
To do i' th' synagogues, and in the streets;[7]
That men may give them praises. Verily
They have their recompence, I testify.
But when thou dost alms, let thy left hand know
Not what thy right hand is about to do:
That giving secretly, thy Father may,
Who sees in secret, openly repay.
And when thou pray'st be not as hypocrites;
For they love in the corners of the streets,
And in the synagogues to stand and pray,
There to be seen: they've their reward I say.
But thou, when thou dost make thy pray'r, go thee
Into thy closet, shut thy door unto thee,
And there in secret to thy Father cry,
Who seeing thee shall reward thee openly.
But when ye pray use not vain repetitions,
As heathens do, for they think their petitions
Prevail; when they the same do multiply:
Be ye not like to them therefore; for why;
Your Father knows what things you need before
You ask him, on this wise pray ye therefore.

Our Father which art in heav'n, thy name alone
Be hallowed. Thy glorious kingdom come.
Thy will be done on earth as 'tis in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread. And ev'n
As we remit our debtors, grant remission
To us. And lead us not into temptation,
But from all evil do thou us deliver;
For th' kingdom, power and glory's thine for ever.
Amen.

For if you do forgive men that offend,
Your heavenly Father will to you extend
Forgiveness; but if not, nor will he spare,
At any time when you offenders are.
Moreover when you fast beware lest you
Look sad, as hypocrites are wont to do;
For they disguise their faces, that they may
Appear to fast: they've their reward I say.
But thou, when thou dost fast, anoint thine head
And wash thy face, that undiscovered
Thy fasting may be unto men, but rather
That thou be seen in secret of thy Father:
And then thy Father, who in secrecy
Beholds thee, shall reward thee openly.
Lay not up treasure for yourselves in store
Upon the earth, where moth and rust devour,
And where by thieves you may be quite bereaven.
But lay up treasure for yourselves in heaven,
Where neither moth, nor rust, nor thieves can enter:
For where's your treasure there your hearts will centre.
The eye's the light o' th' body, which if right
Then thy whole body will be full of light:
But if thine eye be evil, then there will
A total darkness thy whole body fill.
If therefore all the light that is in thee
Be darkness, how great must that darkness be?
No man can serve two masters, either he
Will hate one, and love t'other, or will be
Faithful to one, and t'other will forego.
Ye cannot serve both God and mammon too.
Take no thought therefore for your life, I say,
What you shall eat or drink; or how you may
Your bodies clothe. Is not the life much more
Than meat; Is not the body far before
The clothes thereof? Behold the fowls o' th' air,
Nor sow nor reap, nor take they any care;
How they provision into barns may gather;
Yet they are nourish'd by your heavenly Father:
Are ye not worth much more? Which of you can
By taking thought add to his height one span?
And why for raiment are ye taking thought?
See how the lilies grow; they labour not,
Nor do they spin; yet Solomon, I say,
In all his pomp, had no such gay array.
If in the field God so doth clothe the grass,
Which is to-day, and doth to-morrow pass
Into the oven, shall he not therefore
O ye of little faith, clothe you much more?
Take no thought therefore, saying, What shall we eat,
Or drink, or where shall we our raiment get:
(For thus the heathen people use to do)
For that you need them doth your Father know.
But seek God's kingdom, and his righteousness
First, and then all these things you shall possess.
Be not then exercis'd with care and sorrow,
In making preparation for the morrow;
The morrow shall things for itself prepare:
Sufficient to the day is each day's care.

CHAP. VII.

Judge not that you may not be judg'd; for even
As you pass judgment, judgment shall be giv'n:
And with such measure as you mete to men,
It shall be measured unto you again.
And why dost thou take notice of the mote
That's in thy brother's eye; but dost not note
The beam that's in thine own? How wilt thou say
Unto thy brother, let me take away
The mote that's in thine eye, when yet 'tis plain
The beam that's in thine own doth still remain?
First cast away the beam, thou hypocrite,
From thine own eye, so shall thy clearer sight
The better be enabled to descry,
And pluck the mote out of thy brother's eye.
Give not to dogs the things that are divine,
Neither cast ye your pearls before the swine
Lest that they should their feet them trample under,
And turn upon you, and rend you asunder.
Ask, and obtain; seek, and ye shall find; do ye
Knock, and it shall be opened unto ye:
For he that seeks, shall find; that asks, obtain,
And he that knocks, shall an admittance gain.
Or what man is there of you, if his son

Shall ask him bread, will he give him a stone?
Or if he ask a fish, will he bestow
A serpent? If then ye being evil know
To give your children good gifts, how much rather
To them that ask him shall your heav'nly Father.
Then what you wou'd men shou'd to you, so do
To them: for that's the law and prophets too.
Enter in at the strait gate, for the road
That doth unto destruction lead, is broad;
And wide the gate; and many there be that
Enter therein: because strait is the gate,
And narrow is the way that is inclin'd
To life, and which there are but few that find.
False prophets shun, who in sheep's clothes appear,
But inwardly devouring wolves they are:
Ye by their fruits shall know them. Do men either
Pluck grapes of thorns, or figs or thistles gather?
Even so each good tree good fruit will produce;
But a corrupt tree fruit unfit for use:
A good tree cannot bring forth evil food,
Nor can an evil tree bear fruit that's good:
Each tree that bears not good fruit's hewn down
And burnt, thus by their fruits they shall be known.
Not every one that saith Lord, Lord, but he
That doth my heav'nly Father's will shall be
An heir of heaven: many in that day
Will call Lord, Lord, and thus to me will say;
Have we not prophesied in thy name?
Cast devils out, done wonders in the same?
And then will I profess I know you not;
Depart from me ye that have evil wrought.
Whoso therefore these sayings of mine doth hear,
And doth them, to a wise man I'll compare,
The which upon a rock his building founded,
The rain descended and the floods surrounded,
The winds arose, and gave it many a shock,
And it fell not, being founded on a rock.
And ev'ry one that hears these sayings of mine,
And not to do them doth his heart incline,
Unto a foolish man shall be compar'd;
Who his foundation on the sand prepar'd:
The rain descended and the floods were great,
The winds did blow, and vehemently beat
Against that house; and down the building came,
And mighty was the downfall of the same.
And now when Jesus thus had finished
His sayings, the people were astonished
Thereat: for not as do the scribes taught he
Them, but as one that had authority.



THE PROPHECY OF JONAH

CHAP. I.

Now unto Jonah, old Amittai's son,
Thus did the word of the Almighty come,
And said, Arise, go thou forthwith and cry
'Gainst that great city Nineveh; for why,
The sins thereof are come up in my sight.
But he arose, that he to Tarshish might
Flee from God's presence; and went down and found
A ship at Joppa unto Tarshish bound:
He paid the fare, and with them went on board
For Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord.
But the Almighty a great wind did raise,
And sent a mighty tempest on the seas,
So that the ship was likely to be broken.
Then were the mariners with horror stricken;
And to his God they cried every one;
And overboard was the ship's lading thrown
To lighten it: but down into the ship
Was Jonah gone, and there lay fast asleep.
So to him came the master and did say,
What meanest thou, O sleeper! rise and pray
Unto thy God, and he perhaps will hear,
And save us from the danger that we fear.
Then said they to each other, Come let's try,
By casting lots, on whom the fault doth lie,
In bringing all this evil now upon us.
So they cast lots, and the lot fell on Jonas.
Then said they, We entreat thee let us know,
For whose cause we this evil undergo,
Whence comest thou? What is thine occupation?
What countryman art thou? And of what nation?
And unto them himself he did declare,
And said, I am an Hebrew, and do fear
The living Lord, the God of heaven, who
Alone hath made the sea and dry land too.
Then were the men exceedingly afraid;
And, wherefore hast thou done this thing? they said:
(For they did understand he did forego
God's presence, for himself had told them so.)
What shall we do unto thee, then they said,
That so the raging of the sea be stay'd?
(For it did rage and foam.) Take me, said he,
And cast me overboard into the sea;
So shall the sea be calm, for on my score

I know it is, that thus the waves do roar.
Nevertheless they rowed hard to gain
The land, but all their labour was in vain;
So much against them did the tempest beat.
Wherefore they the Almighty did entreat,
And said, We do beseech thee, and we pray,
O Lord, that thou would'st not upon us lay
The charge of guiltless blood, nor let it be,
That now we perish, on th' account that we
Take this man's life away; for thou alone
As it hath pleased thee, O Lord, hast done.
So they took Jonah up, and to the seas
Committed him, then did the tempest cease.
Then did the dread of the great God on high,
Seize on the mariners exceedingly.
And they did offer up a sacrifice,
And vowed vows unto the Lord likewise.
And now the Lord for Jonah did contrive
A mighty fish, to swallow 'im up alive,
And in the fish's belly for the space
Of three days and three nights, poor Jonah was.

CHAP. II.

Unto the Lord his God then Jonah pray'd
Out of the belly of the fish, and said,
By reason of affliction, which lay sore
Upon me, I the Lord God did implore,
And he gave ear; and from Hell's Belly I
Cry'd unto thee, and thou, Lord, heard'st my cry:
For thou into the deep hadst cast me out,
And there the floods did compass me about;
In the midst of the sea, thy waves were sent,
And all thy billows which my head o'erwent.
Then said I though thy presence hath forsook
Me, to thy holy temple will I look.
The waters compassed about my soul,
And the great deeps did round about me roll,
The weeds were wrapt about my head, I went
Down to the bottom of the element;
The earth with her strong bars surrounded me,
Yet thou, O Lord, from death hast set me free.
When my soul fainted, on the Lord I thought,
And to thee, to thy temple then was brought
My prayer. They their own mercies do despise,
Who have regard to lying vanities.
But with the voice of my thanksgiving, I
Will offer sacrifice to thee on high,
And pay my vows which I have vow'd, each one,
For why? Salvation's of the Lord alone.
And now the fish, as God did give command,
Did vomit Jonah out upon dry land.

CHAP. III.

And now the second time to Jonah came
God's word, and said, Arise, go and proclaim
To that great city Nineveh, what
Have heretofore commanded thee to cry.
So Jonah rose up, and prepar'd to go
To Nineveh, as God had bid him do.
(Now was the city Nineveh so great,
That it was three days' journey long complete)
And as into the city Jonah made
His first day's journey, he cry'd out and said,
When forty days shall be expired and past,
This city Nineveh shall be laid waste.
Then did the Ninevites with one accord,
Believe this was the message of the Lord;
And did proclaim a fast, and every one,
From greatest to the least, put sackcloth on:
For to the king this news was quickly flown,
And he arose, and came down from his throne,
And having laid aside his robes of state,
He put on sackcloth, and in ashes sate:
And issuing out his royal proclamation,
And through the city making publication
Thereof (being by the king and council sign'd)
A solemn and a general fast enjoin'd;
And said, I will, that neither man nor beast,
Nor flock, nor herd, shall their provision taste:
But let them all put sackcloth on and cry
Unto the Lord with greatest fervency;
Yea, let them all their evil ways refrain,
And from the violence which they retain.
Who knows if God will yet be pleas'd to spare,
And turn away the evil that we fear?
And God beheld their works, and saw that they
Had turned from the evil of their way.
And God turn'd from his wrath, and did revoke
The dreadful judgment whereof he had spoke.

CHAP. IV.

But hereat Jonah was extremely vext,
And in his mind exceedingly perplext:
And to the Lord his God he pray'd, and said,
O Lord, I pray thee, was not I afraid
Of this, when I was yet at home? Therefore
I unto Tarshish took my flight before:
For that thou art a gracious God I know,
Of tender mercy, and to anger slow,
Of great compassion, and dost oft recall
The evil thou dost threat mankind withal.
Now therefore, Lord, I earnestly do pray
That thou would'st please to take my life away,
For I had better die than live. Dost thou
Do well, said God, to be so angry now?
So then out of the city Jonah went,
And on the east side of it made a tent,[8]
And underneath the shade thereof he sate,
Expecting what would be the city's fate.
And over Jonah's head behold the Lord
Prepar'd, and caused to come up a gourd
To shadow him, and ease him of his grief;
And Jonah was right glad of this relief.
But God a worm sent early the next day,
Which smote the gourd; it withered away:
And when the sun arose, it came to pass,
That God a vehement east wind did raise;
Besides the sun did beat upon his head,
So that he fainted, saying, Would I were dead,
For it is better for me now to die,
Than thus to lead my life in misery.
And to distressed Jonah, said the Lord,
Dost thou well to be angry for the gourd?
And he unto the Lord made this reply,
I do well to be angry e'en to die.
Thou hast had pity, Jonah, on the gourd,
For which thou didst not labour, said the Lord,
Nor madest it to grow, which also came
Up in a night, and perish'd in the same.
And should not I extend my gracious pity
To Nineveh, so populous a city,
Where more than six score thousand persons dwell,
Who 'twixt their right hand, and their left can tell
No difference, wherein are also found
Cattle which do in multitudes abound.



THE LIFE OF JOSEPH,
TAKEN OUT OF THE LATTER PART OF THE BOOK OF GENESIS.

CHAP XXXVII.

When Jacob from his brother Esau fled,
He by the hand of providence was led
To Padan-aram, in Assyria, where
He serv'd his uncle Laban twenty year;
During which time he was in all things blest,
And with a num'rous issue 'mongst the rest:
Amongst whom none so pleasing in his sight
As Joseph was, who was his chief delight:
Who by the time that Jacob was return'd
Into the land, where's fathers had sojourn'd,
Was full arrived at seventeen years of age;
And by his hopefulness did then presage,
He was endued with a noble mind,
That would to virtuous actions be inclin'd;
For being sent to feed his father's flock,
Among his brethren he great notice took
Of what they did, and if in any sort
They did amiss, he thereof made report
Unto his father, and did thus create
His father's favour, but his brethren's hate.
His father loved him better than the rest,
As being the son wherewith his age was blest.
And that his kindness might the more appear,
Made him a party colour'd coat to wear.
But as it often haps, his father's love
Did in his brethren greater hatred move.
But that which most incens'd them was his dreams,
By which, in a prophetic way, he seems
Their low submission, and his future state
Of greatness plainly to prognosticate.
For to his brethren thus his dreams he told,
And said, As we were binding sheaves, behold,
My sheaf arose and stood up in the field,
And all your sheaves stood round about, to yield
Obeisance unto mine: And what, must we
Indeed, say they, be subject unto thee?
Their wrath increas'd, this added to his crime.
And Joseph dreamed yet a second time;
And said, Behold, I saw the sun and moon,
And the eleven stars to me fall down.
At which his father highly was offended,
And for these words, the lad he reprehended,
And said, Fond youth, dost thou pretend to shew
That I, thy mother, and thy brethren too,
Must all submit to thee? Thou dost but dream:
But Jacob kept his words, and thought of them.
Now Jacob's sons did feed their flocks in Shechem,
And he desired Joseph to go seek them,
And find them out, and come again and tell
If all things with them and their flocks were well.
So Joseph went, and wander'd here and there,
But could not find out where his brethren were,
Until a man had told him their intent
Of going to Dotham, where he also went.
And when his brethren at a distance saw him,
They held a consultation how to slay him,
And said, Here comes the dreamer, we shall see
What the event of all his dreams will be;
For we will kill, and in a pit will hide him,
And say some beast or other hath destroy'd him.
But Reuben somewhat tend'rer than the rest,
Endeavour'd to persuade them to desist
From murder, saying, Into this pit let's cast him,
And this he said in hopes to have releas'd him.
And now when Joseph came not dreading ought,
They stript him of his party colour'd coat,
And led him to a pit that was hard by,
And threw him into't, but the pit was dry.
And sitting down to eat, they chanc'd to spy,
A company of Ishmaelites pass by,
Who with balm, myrrh, and spice, their camels lading,
From Gilead came, and were to Egypt trading.
Then Judah said, 'Twill do us little good
To slay our brother, and conceal his blood;
Come therefore, brethren, be advis'd by me,
Let's sell him to these Ishmaelites, for he
Is our own flesh, and 'tis a cruel deed,
To kill him, and to this they all agreed.
Their brother then out of the pit they hale,
And to these merchants offer'd him to sale:
Who, him for twenty silver pieces bought,
And with them to the land of Egypt brought.
But Reuben, ignorant of what was done,
Came to the pit, and seeing the lad was gone,
He rent his clothes in a great consternation,
Returning back with heavy lamentation.
And now that they might make their story good
They kill'd a kid, and dipped in the blood
Their brother Joseph's coat, and home they came,
And to their father's view expos'd the same,
And said, This we have found, now thou dost know
Whether it be thy son's coat, yea or no.
And Jacob knew the coat full well, and said,
Now hath some evil beast devour'd the lad;
Joseph is torn in pieces without doubt,
For, too, too well I know this is his coat.
He rent his clothes, and putting sackcloth on,
He for a long time mourned for his son.
His children striving to assuage his grief
Endeavour'd to administer relief:
But he refus'd, and said, Since he is gone,
I will in sorrow to the grave go down.
Such lamentation made he for his son.

CHAP. XXXIX.

And now these merchants, sons of Ishmael,
Again did poor afflicted Joseph sell,
To an Egyptian, named Potiphar,
The captain of King Pharaoh's men of war.
And God was with him, and did greatly bless,
And crown his undertakings with success.
Whereof his master being well aware,
Committed all he had to Joseph's care;
And made him overseer of his house,
And, from the time his master us'd him thus,
The Lord was pleas'd to give him to partake,
So many blessings, e'en for Joseph's sake:
Of that with plenty he was hedg'd about,
And prospered within door and without.
Such was his master's love, and he so just,
That all things were committed to his trust.
Now Joseph was grown up to manly stature,
Of goodly presence, and most comely feature.
Wherefore his mistress, with a lustful eye,
Beheld his beauty, and resolv'd to try,
If to unchaste embraces she could gain
The youth, but her endeavours prov'd in vain:
For he refus'd, and said, My master knows
In all the house of nothing that he owes,[9]
For his concerns are all at my dispose:
There's not a thing that he hath kept from me
But all is in my hand, save only thee;
Then how can I commit so foul a fact,
And the displeasure of my God contract?
Yet still she sued, and still did he deny her,
Refusing to be with her, or lie by her.
Now on a time when all the men were gone
Out of the house, and she was left alone:
And Joseph at that instant coming in,
About some business he'd to do within;
She took advantage of their being together,
And held his clothes to force him to lie with her.
But Joseph strove, and from her hands got loose,
And left his coat, and fled out of the house.
And when she saw that he had made's escape,
She call'd her servants, and proclaim'd a rape:
Come see now how this Hebrew slave, said she,
Your master's favourite, hath affronted me.
He came to violate my chastity,
And when he heard that I began to cry,
And call for help, afraid lest you should find him,
He's fled, and left his garment here behind him.
And now to give her words the greater credit,
Until her husband's coming home, she hid it,
To whom she spake, and said, Why hast thou brought
This Hebrew here, to set me thus at nought?
The slave attempted to defile my bed,
And when I cry'd, he left his coat and fled,
See here it is. Which when he saw, and heard
The heavy accusation she preferr'd,
He was exceeding wroth at his behavior,
And utterly cashier'd him from his favour;
Nay more, he cast him into prison, where
In fetters bound, King Pharaoh's pris'ners were.
But Joseph's God, who never yet forsook
Him in extremity, was pleas'd to look
With great compassion on his injuries,
And gave him favour in the keeper's eyes;
So that he was entrusted with the care
And charge of all the pris'ners that were there:
All were committed unto Joseph's hand,
And what was done, was done at his command.
The prison-keeper took no care at all,
Of ought that he entrusted him withal;
Because he saw that God was with him, and
All things did prosper that he took in hand.

CHAP. XL.

And now, whilst Joseph in confinement lay,
It came to pass upon a certain day,
That Pharaoh King of Egypt, being wroth
With his chief butler, and chief baker both,
For their offences, put them both in ward,
In the house of the captain of the guard:
Into the place where Joseph was confin'd,
Unto whose custody they were resign'd;
And he attended on them in the prison.
And there they were continue'd for a season,
During which time it chanced both of them
Did in the same night dream each man his dream:
Which dreams, according to interpretation,
Had to themselves particular relation.
And Joseph coming early the next day,
Into the room where Pharaoh's servants lay,
Beheld their countenances much dejected:
Wherefore he said, What evil hath effected
This melancholy frame, what is't that causes
These marks of discontentment in your faces?
Then said they, We have dream'd each man his dream,
And there is no man to interpret them.
Then Joseph said, Your dreams to me make known.
Interpretations are from God alone.
Then unto Joseph the chief butler told
His dream, and said, Methought I did behold
A vine, whereon three branches did appear,
Which seem'd to bud, to blossom, and to bear
Clusters of full ripe grapes, which to my thinking
I press'd into the cup for Pharaoh's drinking.
And Joseph said, Thy dream doth signify,
Thou shalt enjoy thy former dignity:
The branches which thou sawest are three days,
In which King Pharaoh will his butler raise
And to thy place again will thee restore,
And thou shalt serve him as thou'st done before:
But do not, when it shall be well with thee,
Forget me, but show kindness unto me,
And unto Pharaoh represent my case,
That I may be deliver'd from this place;
For I was stol'n out of the Hebrew's land,
And also here am wrongfully detained.
Then the chief baker having understood,
That the interpretation was so good,
He told his dream to Joseph too, and said,
Lo, I had three white baskets on my head,
And in the uppermost there seem'd to be,
Of baked provision, great variety,
Fit for King Pharaoh's table, and there came
A flock of birds, and seem'd to eat the same.
And Joseph said, Thy dream portends thy fall,
For at the end of three days Pharaoh shall
Lift up thy head, and hang thee on a tree,
So that the birds shall feast themselves on thee.
And on the third day Pharaoh made a feast
Unto his servants, and among the rest
The butler and the baker were brought forth,
The day being kept in memory of his birth.
And to his place King Pharaoh did restore
His butler, and he served him as before.
But the chief baker he condemn'd to die,
According unto Joseph's prophecy.
Yet though the butler had regain'd his place,
He was unmindful of poor Joseph's case.

CHAP. XLI.

And now when two years' time was fully past,
And Joseph from confinement not releast,
It came to pass that Pharaoh dream'd, and
He seemed by a river-side to stand,
Whence he seven fat well-favour'd kine beheld,
Come up and grazed in the neighbouring field.
And after them there came up seven more,
Lean and ill-favour'd, and did soon devour
The seven fat kine which came up just before.
So Pharaoh 'woke, and mus'd awhile, and then
Soon as his sleep his dream returned again:
Wherein he saw upon one stalk there stood
Seven ears of corn exceeding rank and good,
And seven others, with the east wind blasted,
And withered, sprang up, and quickly wasted
The seven good ears, and quite devour'd them:
And Pharaoh 'woke, and lo, it was a dream.
And in the morning he was discontent,
And for the wise men and magicians sent,
To ease his mind; but there was none of them
That could interpret to the king his dream.
Then the chief butler, making his address
Unto King Pharaoh, said, I now confess
My former faults, for when the king was wroth
With his chief butler, and chief baker both,
It pleased him, to put us both in ward,
In the house of the captain of the guard:
And in one night we dream'd a dream, each one
According to 's interpretation:
And there was then an Hebrew there in ward,
A youth that serv'd the captain of the guard:
To whom we told whereof we had been dreaming,
And he interpreted to us the meaning;
And what he said fell out accordingly,
Me he restored to my dignity,
But told the baker he should surely die.
Then Pharaoh sent a messenger in haste,
And Joseph from the dungeon was releas'd:
And having shav'd himself and chang'd his clothes,
Into the presence of the king he goes.
To whom King Pharaoh said, I have been told
Thou canst the meaning of a dream unfold:
Now I have dream'd a dream, and there is none
Can give me the interpretation.
And Joseph said, I cannot do this thing
Myself, but God shall answer thee, oh king.
Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, In my dream,
As I stood by a river's side, there came
Up from the river seven well-favour'd kine,
And fed upon the banks, all fat and fine,
And after them there came up seven more,
Lean and ill-favour'd, and exceeding poor:
Such as the land of Egypt never bred,
And on the seven well-favour'd kine they fed,
And eat them up, but 'twas not to be seen
That they had eat them, they look'd still so thin.
So I awoke, and mus'd awhile, and then
Soon as my sleep, my dream return'd again;
Wherein I saw upon one stalk there stood
Seven ears of corn, exceeding rank and good:
Then seven others, with the east wind blasted,
And withered, came up, and quickly wasted
The seven good ears, and quite devoured them.
And being unsatisfied about my dream,
I sought unto the wise men of the nation,
But they could give me no interpretation.
And Joseph said, Thy dream, oh king! is one,
God shews to Pharaoh what he will have done.
The seven fat kine and seven good ears agree
To shew, seven years of plenty there shall be.
The seven lean kine, and seven blasted ears,
Denote there shall be famine seven years.
This I declare to Pharaoh, God doth shew
To thee, oh king! what he's about to do.
Behold seven years of plenty are at hand,
Which shall be very great throughout the land.
And after them seven years of famine shall
Arise, and shall consume the land, and all
The former plenty shall not be perceiv'd,
So much the land with famine shall be griev'd.
And since the dream was doubl'd to the king,
It is because God hath decreed the thing,
And on this land the same will shortly bring:
Now therefore if I may the king advise,
Let him look out a man discreet and wise,
And make him overseer of the land:
And substitute men under his command
To gather a fifth part for public use,
Of what the seven plenteous years produce;
And in the cities lay it up for store,
Against the famine in the land grows sore;
And let it be repos'd in Pharaoh's hand,
That so the famine may not waste the land.
And when King Pharaoh and his servants heard
The propositions Joseph had preferr'd,
They were acceptable in Pharaoh's eyes,
And in the eyes of all his court likewise:
So that he said, Can such an one be found?
A man in whom God's Spirit doth abound.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Forasmuch
As God's great kindness unto thee is such,
As to reveal this thing to thee, I know
No man so wise or so discreet as thou.
Be thou therefore the ruler of the land,
And let my people be at thy command;
Thou shalt in all things be as great as I,
Save only in the royal dignity.
Behold this day I have advanced thee
Said he, to be a man of high degree
Throughout the land. And therewithal the king
Bestow'd on Joseph his own royal ring;
And him with robes of state did richly deck,
And put a chain of gold about his neck,
And in his second chariot made him ride,
And as he past, Bow down the knee they cry'd,
With so great honour was he dignifi'd.
And Pharaoh said moreover, I am king,
No man shall dare to purpose any thing,
Or move his hand or foot in all this nation,
Unless it shall be by thy approbation.
He also gave to Joseph a new name,
And for a wife gave him a princely dame,
Who was the daughter of a priest of fame.
(Now Joseph had attained his thirtieth year,
When he before King Pharaoh did appear.)
And he went out from Pharaoh's presence, and
Began his progress over all the land.
Now in the seven plenteous years, the field
Did its increase in great abundance yield.
And Joseph gather'd all that plenteous crop,
And in th' adjacent cities laid it up:
Which like unto the sand upon the shore,
Did so abound that he could count no more,
Such was the plenty that the earth then bore.
And unto Joseph there was born a son,
Even by the daughter of the priest of On,
Before the years of famine were begun;
The which he call'd Manasseh, for, said he,
God makes me to forget my misery,
And all my father's house. And after him
Was born another he called Ephraim;
For God, saith he, hath made me to possess
Abundance in the land of my distress.
And when the seven plenteous years were gone,
The seven years of famine next came on,
As Joseph said, and there was a great dearth
In every nation throughout all the earth;
But in the land of Egypt there was bread.
And when the people almost famished,
Complained to the king, he bade them go
To Joseph, and whate'er he said to do.
And now the famine daily waxing sore,
Joseph began to bring forth of his store,
Which he had laid up for the public good;
To whom th' Egyptians came and bought their food.
And people from all countries far and near
To Egypt came to buy provision there;
For in all lands the famine was severe.

CHAP. XLII.

And now, behold, when Jacob had been told
That there was corn in Egypt to be sold,
He said unto his sons, Why stand ye thus?
Go down to Egypt and buy corn for us;
That so our craving stomachs may be fed,
And not be here and die for lack of bread.
Thus Jacob's ten sons were to Egypt sent,
But Joseph's brother Benjamin ne'er went.
For why, his father said, I will not send him,
Lest peradventure some ill chance attend him.
And Joseph's brethren came among the rest
To buy provision, for they were distress'd.
Now he was governor of all the land,
And all the corn of Egypt in his hand.
Wherefore his brethren, when they came to treat
With him for corn, bow'd down e'en at his feet:
And he no sooner saw them but he knew them,
And show'd himself extremely strange unto them:
And very roughly asked who they were,
From whence they came, and what their bus'ness there.
And they made answer, We thy servants from
The land of Canaan to buy food are come.
Now tho' they knew him not, yet he knew them,
And calling now to mind his former dream,
He said, I do suspect ye're come as spies,
To see in what distress our country lies.
But they reply'd again, My lord, we're come
Only to buy some food to carry home.
Think not thy servants spies, but true men rather,
For we are all the children of one father.
Nay, nay, said he, but ye are come to pry
Into the nation's great necessity.
But they reply'd again, Thy servants are
Inhabitants of Canaan, and declare,
That we're twelve brethren, whom one man begot,
The youngest is at home, and one is not
Well then, said Joseph, hereby shall I know,
Whether ye're spies, as I have said, or no;
Now by the life of Pharaoh do I swear,
Until your brother come I'll keep you here.
Send one of you and fetch the lad to me,
And you shall be confin'd, so shall there be
A proof of what you say before mine eyes,
Or by the life of Pharaoh ye are spies.
Then he for three days put them all in ward,
And on the third day said, I have regard
To equity, therefore if ye are true
And honest men, do this; let one of you
Be bound in prison here, and let the other
Go carry corn home and bring me your brother;
So shall ye be approv'd and shall not die.
And they prepared to do accordingly.
And as they were discoursing to each other,
They said, We were in fault about our brother,
In that we saw his soul in great distress,
And yet were so exceeding pitiless,
As not to hearken to his earnest cries:
This is the cause of these our miseries.
And Reuben said, You know I did forewarn,
And beg that you would do the child no harm;
But you would not do then as I desir'd,
And now his blood is at our hands requir'd.
Thus they discours'd about the cause that brought
Their present trouble, but they little thought
That Joseph knew of what they did confer,
Because he spake by an interpreter.
And he being moved at their words withdrew
To weep, and then returned to renew
His former talk; and choosing Simeon out,
Before them all he bound him hand and foot.
And gave command to fill their sacks with grain,
And to restore their money to 'em again;
And for their journey gave them food to eat;
In such sort Joseph did his brethren treat.
Then with their asses laden towards home
They went, and when into their inn they come
As one of them his sack of corn unty'd,
To give his ass some provender, he spy'd
His money in his sack again return'd;
Wherefore he call'd his brethren and inform'd
Them that his money was returned back.
Behold, said he, it is here in my sack.
On sight whereof their hearts were sore dismay'd,
And being very much affrighted said,
What is the thing that God's about to do,
That we do thus these troubles undergo?
Then coming to their father they related,
After what sort they were in Egypt treated:
And said, the man that's lord of all the land,
And hath the store of corn all in his hand,
Spake roughly to us, and affirm'd that we
Were come the weakness of the land to see.
To whom we said, We are all honest men;
We are twelve brethren, whereof here are ten,
And two elsewhere, all which one man begot,
The youngest's with our father, one is not.
Then said the ruler of the land, Hereby
Shall I make proof of your integrity:
Let one of you continue here with me,
And take provision for your family;
And get you gone and bring the youngest hither,
That so I may be satisfied whether
Ye are true men, as you make protestation,
Then I'll release him, and give toleration
To you to come and traffic in the nation.
And now behold as they their sacks unloos'd
To empty out their corn, there was unclos'd
In each man's sack his money therein bound,
As when they came from home, which when they found,
Both they and their old father were afraid;
And to his sons afflicted Jacob said,
You of my children have bereaved me,
Joseph and Simeon now do cease to be;
And of my Benjamin you would deprive me,
These things do ev'n into distraction drive me.
Then Reuben said, My father I resign
To thy disposing these two sons of mine;
Give me the lad, and let them both be slain,
If I do not return him safe again.
But he reply'd, I will not let him go,
For why his brother is deceas'd you know;
And if upon the way some evil thing
Should happen to the lad, you then will bring
These my grey hairs with sorrow to the grave;
For he's the only comfort that I have.

CHAP. XLIII.

And now the famine still continuing sore,
And having spent all their late purchas'd store,
Their father bids them to go down for more
To whom when Judah had himself address'd,
He said, The man did solemnly protest,
If we without our brother came again,
To seek his face would be for us in vain:
If therefore thou wilt send him, well and good,
Then will we willingly go down for food;
But if thou wilt not, we must let thee know,
We are resolved that we will not go:
For, as I said before, the ruler swore
Without him we should see his face no more.
Then Israel said, Why were you so unkind
To say you had a brother left behind?
The man, said they, was so inquisitive,
He asked if our father were alive,
Or if we had a brother, whereunto
Accordingly we answer'd, could we know
If he would bid us bring the lad or no?
Moreover Judah to his father said,
If thou wilt but entrust me with the lad,
We will begone, that so both thou and we
May be preserved with our family:
I will be surety for him, if I fail
To bring him back, on me the blame entail;
For if we had not lingered, we had been
By this time here the second time again.
Well then, said Isr'el, if it must be so,
My sons, take my advice before you go;
Provide some of the best fruits of the land,
To give the man a present from your hand;
Balm, myrrh, and spices, and a little honey,
Some nuts and almonds, and take double money,
For peradventure it was a mistake,
In that our money was returned back.
And take your brother Benjamin and go,
And God Almighty grant the man may shew
You mercy, that you may bring back again
Your other brother, and my Benjamin,
And if I am bereav'd, so have I been.
Then did the men prepare the present, and
They took their money double in their hand
With Benjamin, and down to Egypt went,
Who unto Joseph did themselves present.
Who, when he saw that Benjamin was come,
Order'd his steward to conduct them home,
And to provide a dinner, for, said he,
I do intend these men shall dine with me.
Then did the steward as his master said,
And brought them home, whereat they were afraid,
And said, The man hath caus'd us to come in,
Because our money was return'd again;
To take occasion now to fall upon us,
And make us slaves, and take our asses from us.
Unto the steward they drew nigh therefore,
And thus communed with him at the door:
O sir, say they, we came at first indeed
To buy provision to supply our need;
And in our inn as we our sacks unloos'd,
We found our money therein all inclos'd
In its full weight, whereat surpris'd with fear,
Not knowing who had put our money there,
We now have brought it in full weight again,
And other money too, to buy more grain.
Peace, peace, said he, let not fear seize upon you
For I had the disposing of your money:
God, unto whom you and your father bow,
Hath giv'n you treasure in your sacks I trow.
And then releasing Simon, who had been
Confin'd in Joseph's house, he brought them in
And set them water, and they wash'd their feet;
And gave their asses provender to eat.
Then they made ready, against Joseph came,
Their gifts, in order to present the same
At noon; for they were told he did design
To have their company with him to dine.
And now when Joseph was returned home,
Into his presence they with rev'rence come,
And brought their presents in and laid before him,
And fell down at his feet for to adore him.
Then he inquired if they all were well,
And said, When you were here I heard you tell
Of an old man, your father, how does he?
Is he in health, or doth he cease to be?
Whereto in humble sort they thus reply'd,
Thy servant, ev'n our father, doth abide
In perfect health, which having said,
They bowed their heads and great obeisance made.
And Joseph viewing Benjamin his brother
(They being both the children of one mother)
He asked if he were the lad of whom
They spake, then said, God give thee grace, my son.
Then making haste to find a secret place
To weep, because his bowels yearn'd apace
Upon his brother, to his chamber went,
Where having giv'n his troubled spirits vent,
He washed his face, and did himself refrain,
And to his brethren then came forth again,
And bade his servants they should set on bread.
At his command the tables were all spread;
One for himself, and for his friends another,
And for the Egyptians one apart from either,
That so they might not eat bread altogether;
For it is held a great abomination
For them to eat among the Hebrew nation,
And they were placed as their age required,
The eldest first, whereat the men admired.
And from his table Joseph sent them messes;
But in a larger manner he expresses
To Benjamin his kindness, which was such,
That he appointed him five times as much
As to the rest: and they drank plenteously,
Till they were merry in his company.

CHAP. XLIV.

And to his steward Joseph spake, and said,
Give these men corn as much as they can lade;
And in their sacks bind each man's money up,
And in the youngest's put my silver cup
Besides his money: and he made haste and did
According as his master had commanded.
And in the morning by the break of day,
With asses laden they were sent away:
And now, e'er they had scarce the town's end pass'd,
He sent his steward after them in haste,
And said, Go, follow them, and ask them why
They have dealt by me so ungratefully?
And say unto them, You have done great evil
To rob my master, who hath been so civil,
And steal the cup wherein he drinks his wine;
Is it not it whereby he doth divine?[10]
Then he pursu'd and quickly overtook
Them, and these very words to them he spoke.
To whom they said, Why hath my lord such thought?
Oh, God forbid that we should be so naught;[11]
Behold, thou know'st we brought the money back
The which we found bound up in each man's sack,
Which shews that we had no design to cheat;
How then should we now steal your master's plate?
With which of us thy servants it is found
Let him be slain, and we to slavery bound.
Now as you say, said he, so let it be,
He shall be bound, but you shall all go free.
Then they unladed ev'ry man his beast,
And to his view expos'd their sacks in haste.
And he from first to last them searched round,
And lo, the cup on Benjamin was found:
Thereat surpris'd, each man his garment rent,
And lade his beast, and back again they went.
And now when Judah and the rest were come
To Joseph's house, (for he was yet at home)
They fell before him to the ground, to whom
He said, What deed is this that you have done?
Are you not sensible that such a one
As I, can certainly thereof make trial?
Then Judah said, My lord, there's no denial:
We cannot clear ourselves. The Lord hath sent,
For our misdeed, this heavy punishment.
Behold, to be thy slaves we all are bound,
Both we, and he on whom the cup was found.
Then Joseph said, The Lord forbid that I
Should exercise so great severity:
For he with whom 'tis found, and he alone
Shall be my servant, you may all be gone.
Then unto Joseph, Judah drawing near,
Said, O my lord! I pray be pleas'd to hear
Thy servant speak, and be not angry now,
For as King Pharaoh is ev'n so art thou.
My lord did bid thy servants to discover
Whether we had a father or a brother;
And we made answer that thy servants had
An ancient father and a little lad,
The child of his old age, who was our brother,
And he the only child left of his mother,
His brother being dead; and that this lad
Was all the comfort that our father had.
Then thou wert pleas'd to bid thy servants bring
The lad, that thou might'st have a sight of him.
And we made answer, if the lad should leave
His father, it would bring him to his grave:
And thou didst then protest it was in vain
For us without him to come here again.
Then towards home thy servants went their way,
And told our father what my lord did say.
And in a while, when all our corn was spent,
Thy servant, ev'n our father, would have sent
To buy more food; to whom thy servant said,
We cannot go except thou send the lad.
Because the man did solemnly declare,
Unless we brought him we should not come there.
And then thy servant, ev'n our father, said,
Ye know that by my wife two sons I had,
And one of them went forth and came no more,
Which made me think some beast did him devour.
And if I now should also condescend
To let this go, and mischief should attend,
You will with sorrow bring me to my end.
When to my father I shall come therefore,
And he shall see that I do not restore
The lad again, he certainly will die,
(Since in his life my father's life doth lie)
And we shall bring him to his grave thereby.
For I became a surety for the lad
Unto my father, unto whom I said,
If I do not in safety him deliver,
Then let me bear the blame to thee for ever.
I humbly pray thee, therefore, to accept
Me in his stead, and let me here be kept
My lord's bond-slave, and let the lad go free:
For how can I, thy servant, bear to see
The evil that shall on my father come,
If that the lad return not safely home.

CHAP. XLV.

Then Joseph, who by no means now could hide
His brotherly affection longer, cry'd,
Put all men forth; and he was left alone
When to his brethren he himself made known.
Then Joseph weeping lifted up his voice
So loud, that Pharaoh's servants heard the noise.
And to his brethren did himself discover,
And said, Lo! I am Joseph your own brother;
And doth my father live? Whereat amaz'd,
They could not speak, but at each other gaz'd.
Then Joseph said, Come near, I pray, behold,
I am your brother Joseph whom ye sold
To Egypt, be not grieved now therefore,
Nor vex yourselves, for God sent me before
To save life; for these two years there hath been
A famine, and five more to come, wherein
Seed time nor harvest shall at all be seen.
The Lord, I say, hath sent me to provide
A place, and strangely save your lives beside.
So now ye sent me not, but it was rather
The Lord, and he hath made me as a father
Unto the king, lord of his household, and
A ruler over all this spacious land.
Unto my father, therefore, go your way,
And tell him, Thus doth thy son Joseph say:
The Lord hath rais'd me to a high degree
In Egypt, tarry not, but come to me,
And thou shalt dwell in Goshen and be nigh me,
And with provision there will I supply thee;
Both thou and thine, flocks, herds, and all thou hast,
(For yet these five years will the famine last)
Lest otherwise, provision being scant,
Thou and thy family may come to want.
Behold, both you and Benjamin my brother
Do see that it is I and not another.
Go tell my father this amazing story,
And bring him hither to behold my glory.
Then falling on his youngest brother's neck,
And he on his, they o'er each other wept.
And to the rest he did likewise, wherefore
They now were more familiar than before.
And now whilst they discoursed, the report
Of their arrival came to Pharaoh's court,
And he was pleas'd thereat, wherefore he said
To Joseph, let thy brethren straightway lade
Their beasts with corn, and thus unto them say,
Unto your native country haste away,
And fetch your father, and your households, and
I'll feed you with the good things of the land;
And since you are commanded by the king,
Take wagons with you hence wherein to bring
Your wives, your little ones, and come down hither,
Your father, you and yours altogether;
And never heed to bring your household stuff,
For here in Egypt you shall have enough.
Then did the Isr'elites accordingly:
And Joseph ordering them a large supply
Of necessaries for their journey, sent
Wagons according to the king's intent.
And to each man he gave a suit of clothes,
But on his brother Benjamin bestows
Five suits, and as a token of his love,
A sum of money over and above.
And thus he sent ev'n for his father's use,
Of the best things that Egypt did produce,
Ten asses load, and ten she asses load
Of bread and meat, to spend upon the road.
Then sending them away, he said, I pray
See that you do not fall out by the way.
And leaving Egypt with their num'rous train,
Unto their father they returned again:
To whom, as soon as e'er they did arrive,
They said, Our brother Joseph's yet alive,
And lord of all the land, which sore dismay'd
Him, for he scarce believed what they said.
Then they of all that pass'd gave him relation.
And shewed the wagons for a confirmation
Which being manifest before his eyes,
He rais'd himself, and said, It doth suffice;
Joseph my son is yet alive, and I
Will go to see him once before I die.

CHAP. XLVI.

Then Isr'el setting forward on his way
With all his household, came to Beersheba;
And offer'd sacrifice there to implore
The God his father Isaac did adore.
And in the visions of the night God spake
To him, and said, Fear not to undertake
This journey into Egypt, for I am
The God of thy forefathers, Abraham
And Isaac; to the land of Egypt I
Will go with thee, and there will multiply
Thy offspring, and of thee will surely make
A mighty nation, and will bring thee back;
And thy son Joseph there thine eyes shall close.
After which vision he from thence arose,
And in the wagons which King Pharaoh sent,
He and his family to Egypt went:
His sons, their wives and children, and the rest
Of their concerns, whereof they were possest
When they in Canaan dwelt, and they were then
No more in number but threescore and ten.
And when to Egypt Israel drew near
He sent before him Judah, to prepare
His way to Goshen, which when Joseph heard,
Immediately his chariot he prepar'd;
And unto Goshen he directly went,
And to his father did himself present:
And being over-joy'd fell on his neck,
And for a good while thereupon he wept.
Then Jacob said, Since thou yet liv'st, and I
Have seen thy face once more, now let me die.
And Joseph said, My brethren I will go
Unto King Pharaoh, and will let him know
That you, and all my father's house are come;
And that your occupation when at home,
Hath been in feeding cattle altogether,
And that you've brought your flocks and herds all hither.
Now therefore when you come before the king,
And he should ask you what your trade hath been,
Say thus: Thy servants from our youth till now
Have dealt in cattle, we and our fathers too,
That he may let you dwell in Goshen, for
Th' Egyptians do a shepherd's life abhor.

CHAP. XLVII.

Then to King Pharaoh Joseph went and said,
My father and his sons, with all they had
In their own country, are come down to me,
And in the land of Goshen now they be.
Five of his brethren also with him went,
Whom he unto King Pharaoh did present,
And Pharaoh asked them about their trade,
And they unto the king reply'd and said:
We and our fathers while we were at home
Were shepherds all, and now behold, we come
With all our flocks, to get some pasture here,
For in our land the famine is severe.
We therefore pray thee to appoint a portion
Unto thy servants in the land of Goshen.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I empow'r thee
To use thy pleasure, Goshen is before thee;
Settle thy father and thy brethren there,
And if among them active men there are,
Commit my cattle to their special care.
And Joseph brought his aged father in
Before the king, and Jacob blessed him.
And Pharaoh asking him about his age,
He said, The years of my life's pilgrimage
Are but an hundred thirty, very few
And evil, nor have I attain'd unto
The years of my forefathers longer age,
Which they pass'd thro' in this their pilgrimage.
And Jacob bless'd the king again, and then
Out of his presence he return'd again.
And Joseph plac'd his father and relations
In Egypt, and appointed them possessions
In the best of the land, ev'n in the land
Of Rameses, according to the king's command:
And there he nourished them with fit supplies
Of bread, according to their families.
And now the people having spent their store,
And famine still increasing more and more,
Egypt and Canaan too, for want of bread,
Were sore distress'd and almost famished.
And Joseph took the money they did bring
To buy their corn, and kept it for the king.
Wherefore the people came to represent
Their case to him, both corn and coin being spent.
And Joseph said, If money be grown scant,
Bring me your cattle and ye shall not want.
And they brought horses, asses, and their flocks
And herds of cattle, ev'n all their stocks,
And gave to Joseph in exchange for bread,
For which the people he for that year fed:
And when that year was past, the second year
They came again, and said, We can't forbear
To let thee know our want, my lord doth know
Thou hast our money and our cattle too,
And there is nothing left (so hard's our fate)
But only each man's person and estate:
If thou wilt give us bread, into thy hands
Will we resign our persons and our lands:
And be the servants of the king for ever.
From death therefore our hungry souls deliver,
And take some pity on our wretched state,
Lest we die, and the land be desolate.
And the Egyptians sold each man his field,
Because the famine over them prevail'd;
And all their lands became the king's possession,
And Joseph placed them at his own discretion.
But the land of the priests he purchased not,
For Pharaoh had assigned to them their lot:
And they received their food from Pharaoh's hands,
Wherefore they had no need to sell their lands.
And Joseph said unto them, Now behold,
You and your lands are unto Pharaoh sold:
Lo! here is seed to sow in each man's field,
And when the land its ripe increase shall yield,
A fifth part shall belong unto the crown,
And the other four parts shall be your own,
For seed to sow your lands, and for supplies
Of food convenient for your families.
And they said; Thou hast sav'd our lives, my lord,
Thy gracious favour unto us afford,
And we will do according to thy word.
And Joseph made it a decree, to stand
Ev'n to this day throughout th' Egyptian land;
That Pharaoh should have a fifth part, except
The priests' lands, which unto themselves they kept.
And in the land of Egypt ev'n in Goshen,
Did Isr'el dwell, and therein had possession;
And grew and multiply'd exceeding fast.
And Jacob liv'd till seventeen years were past:
So that the sum of Jacob's age appears
To be an hundred forty-seven years.
And when the time approach'd that he must die,
He called Joseph, unto whom he said, If I
Have now found favour in thy sight, I pray,
Swear thou unto me that thou wilt not lay
My bones in Egypt, for I fain would lie
Among my ancestors when e'er I die,
And not be bury'd here; therefore fulfil
This my desire; and he reply'd, I will:
And he said, Swear unto me, which he did:
Then Jacob bow'd himself upon his bed.

CHAP. XLVIII.

And now when Joseph heard his father lay
Even at the point of death he hastes away
To visit him, and took along with him
His son Manasseh, and's son Ephraim.
Whereof when Jacob heard he strength'ned
Himself, and rose and sat upon the bed:
And thus to Joseph said, Lo! God appeared
To me at Luz in Canaan, and declared,
That he would bless, and make me a great nation,
And give my seed that land for a possession:
And Jacob said, Behold, these sons of thine
As Reuben and as Simeon shall be mine;
And all the rest that shall be born to thee
Hereafter, shall be thine, and they shall be
Call'd by the name of their own family.
Behold thy mother died upon the way,
When I from Padan came, near Ephratah,
The which is in the land of Canaan, where,
To wit, in Bethlem, did I bury her.
And Jacob seeing Joseph's sons were there,
He asked of him who the children were.
And Joseph said, My father, lo! these be
The sons, God in this place hath given me.
Then Jacob said, I pray thee bring them nigh
To me, and I will bless them e'er I die.
(Now Jacob's eyes, by reason of age, were dim)
And Joseph brought his sons near unto him,
And Jacob kissed and embraced them:
And said, I never thought to see thy face,
And lo! the Lord hath shewn me of thy race.
And Joseph from between his knees brought forth
His sons, and bow'd himself even to the earth:
And in his right hand held up Ephraim,
Towards his father's left hand guiding him
And in his left hand to his father's right,
He held his son Manasseh opposite.
And Isra'l stretching our his right hand, laid
It on the youngest, namely Ephraim's head:
And laid his left hand wittingly upon
Manasseh's head, although the eldest son.
And Jacob blessed Joseph, saying, The God
Of heaven, in whose paths my fathers trod,
Who all my life hath nourish'd me, even he
Who from all evil hath redeemed me,
Bless both the lads, and let them bear my name,
And the name of my fathers Abraham
And Isaac, and let them multiply
In the midst of the earth exceedingly.
And Joseph seeing his father's right hand laid
On Ephraim's head, he was displeas'd, and said,
Not so, my father, lay this hand upon
Manasseh's head, for he's the eldest son:
And therewithal attempted to have laid
His father's right hand on Manasseh's head
But he refus'd and said, I know't my son,
I know't full well, he also shall become
A people, and be mighty: But indeed
His younger brother shall him far exceed,
And many nations shall come from his seed.
Thus Jacob blessed them, and said, In thee
Shall Isra'l bless, and say, God make thee be
Like Ephraim and Manasseh. Thus did he
Prefer the youngest to the first degree.
And Isra'l said to Joseph, Lo! I die,
But God shall visit you, and certainly
Shall bring you back unto your father's land.
And thou shalt have a portion from my hand,
Above thy brethren, which with sword and bow
I took from th' Amorite, my deadly foe.

CHAP. XLIX.

And Jacob called all his sons together,
And said, Ye sons of Jacob come you hither:
And hearken what your aged father says,
Who tells you what shall be in the last days.
Reuben my first born, of my strength the flow'rs,
The excellency of dignity and power:
Unstable as water, be for ever vile,
Because thou did thy father's bed defile.
Simeon and Levi 're brethren. Instruments
Of cruelty lodged in their tents.
Come not, my soul, their secret councils nigh,
My honour, with them have no unity:
For in their wrath they caused a man to fall,
And in their self-will digged down a wall.
Curs'd be their anger, fierce, yea cursed be
Their wrath, for it was full of cruelty.
In Jacob therefore let their seed be spread,
And every where in Israel scattered.
Judah shall have his brethren's praise, and they
Shall bow before him; he his foes shall slay.
Judah's a lion's whelp return'd from prey,
He stoop'd, he couch'd, and as a lion lay;
As an old lion, who shall dare molest,
Or rouse him up, when he lies down to rest.
The sceptre shall from Judah never start,
Nor a lawgiver from his feet depart;
Until the blessed Shiloh come, to whom
The scatter'd people shall from all parts come:
Binding his foal unto the choicest vine,
He wash'd his garments, all of them in wine:
His eyes shall with the blood of th' grapes look red,
And milky whiteness shall his teeth o'erspread.
Lo! Zabulon shall dwell upon the sea,
And heaven for the ship's security,
And unto Zidon shall his border be.
And Issachar is a strong ass between
Two burdens crouching, who when he had seen
That rest was pleasant, and the land was good,
His servile neck unto the yoke he bow'd.
Dan as a judge shall over Isra'l sway,
He shall be as a serpent in the way,
To bite the horse, and cast the rider down.
O God! I have look'd for thy salvation.
Gad by a troop shall be o'ercome, but he
Shall at the last obtain the victory.
The bread of Ashur shall be fat indeed,
And royal dainties shall from his proceed.
Like to a hind let loose is Naphtali,
He speaketh all his words acceptably.
Joseph's a fruitful bough, whose branches tall
Grow by a well, and over-top the wall:
By reason of hatred which the archers bore,
They shot at him and griev'd him very sore,
But Joseph's bow in its full strength abode
And by the arm of Jacob's mighty God,
He was indu'd with strength, from whence alone
Is Isra'l's shepherd, and chief corner-stone:
Ev'n by my father's God, who shall assist
Thee, by th' Almighty God shalt thou be blest,
With blessings from above, and from below,
With blessings of the breast, and womb also.
Thy father's blessings have prevail'd beyond
My ancestors. Unto the utmost bound
Of the perpetual hills, yea let them rest
On Joseph's head, and let him be possest
Of all, who was divided from the rest.
Young Benjamin shall wolf-like take his prey,
And part by night what he hath took by day.
All these are the ten tribes of Israel,
And thus their father did their fate foretell:
And blessed every one of them apart,
According to their personal desert.
Moreover he gave them a charge and said,
Lo! I shall die, but let my bones be laid
Among my ancestors in Canaan, where
Of Ephron, Abraham bought a sepulchre,
Together with a field, to be a place
Of burial, for him and all his race.
(There Abraham and Sarah lie, and there
They Isaac and Rebecca did inter,
And there when Leah died I buried her.)
The field was purchas'd of the sons of Heth.
Thus having said, resigning up his breath
To him that gave 't, his feet into the bed
He drew, and so was number'd to the dead.

CHAP. L.

And Joseph fell upon his father's face,
And did with tears his lifeless lips embrace:
And sends for his physicians and advises
Them to embalm his father's corpse with spices.
And they did so, and forty days did pass.
(For so the manner of embalming was)
And the Egyptians mourned for the space
Of three score and ten days, which being expired
He spake to Pharaoh's servants and desired,
That they would please to speak in Pharaoh's ear,
And tell him that my father made me swear,
That I should bury him in Canaan, where
He hath provided his own sepulchre.
I therefore pray thee that I may obtain
Thy leave, and I will soon return again.
And Pharaoh said, Since thou hast sworn, fulfil
Thy oath, according to thy father's will.
And Joseph went up to accompany
His father's corpse with great solemnity.
And with him went up Pharaoh's servants, and
The prime nobility of all the land,
And Joseph's household, and his brethren all,
Only their flocks, and herds, and children small
Were left behind. Moreover there went up
Chariots and horsemen, ev'n a mighty troop.
And they came up to Atad's threshing floor
Beyond the river Jordan, where full sore
They mourned for him till seven days were past,
So long their mourning in that place did last.
Which when the Canaanites beheld they said,
Surely some eminent Egyptian's dead.
Wherefore they call'd it Abel-mizraim.[12]
Thus did his sons as he commanded them.
For to the land of Canaan they convey'd
Him, and in Machpelah near Mamre, laid
His body in the cave which Ephron sold
To Abraham, for him and his to hold.
And thus when Joseph fully had perform'd
His father's will, to Egypt he return'd,
Together with his brethren, and with all
Them that came with him to the funeral.
Now Joseph's brethren being well aware
That they were fatherless, began to fear
That he would hate them, and requite them all
The evil they had treated him withal.
Wherefore to him they sent a messenger
And said, Behold our father did declare
Before he died, that we should come and say,
Forgive thy brethren's trespasses, I pray;
And their misdeeds, for they have been unkind.
And now we humbly pray thee be inclin'd
To pardon our offences, and the rather
For that we serve the God e'en of thy father.
And Joseph wept when they thus spake, and they
Came nearer, and before him prostrate lay,
And said, We are thy servants all this day.
And Joseph bad them not to be afraid,
For in the place of God am I he said:
For though you meant me ill, God meant it good,
And sent me hither to provide you food.
Now therefore trouble not yourselves, for I
Will nourish you, and all your family.
After this manner did he satisfy,
And treat them with extreme civility.
And Joseph and his father's house remain'd
In Egypt, and he liv'd till he attain'd
An hundred and ten years, and liv'd to see
Of Ephraim's children to the third degree.
And Macher's children of Manasseh's tribe
Were also born some time before he died.
Then Joseph said, My brethren, lo! I die,
But God will visit you undoubtedly;
And to that land again whereof he spake
Unto our ancestors, will bring you back.
And Joseph also made his brethren swear,
That they would not inter his body there.
And thus he ended his life's pilgrimage,
Being an hundred and ten years of age;
And was embalm'd, and in a coffin laid,
In Egypt, till he could be thence convey'd.




THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES

CHAP. I.

Unto the twelve tribes scattered abroad,
James, an apostle of the living God,
And of the Lord Christ Jesus, salutation.
My brethren, when you fall into temptation
Of divers kinds, rejoice, as men that know
From trial of your faith doth patience flow.
But let your patience have its full effect,
That you may be entire, without defect.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him cry
To God, and he will give it lib'rally,
And not upbraid. But let him ask in faith,
Not wavering, for he that wavereth,
Unto a wave o' th' sea I will compare,
Driv'n with the wind and tossed here and there.
For let not such a man himself deceive,
To think that he shall from the Lord receive.
A double-minded man most surely lacketh
Stability in all he undertaketh.
Let ev'ry brother of a low degree
Rejoice in that he is advanc'd, but he
That's rich in being made low, for he shall pass
Away, as doth the flow'r of the grass.
For as the grass, soon as the sun doth rise,
Is scorch'd by reason of the heat, and dies;
Its flow'r fades, and it retains no more
The beauteous comeliness it had before,
So fades the rich man, maugre all his store.
The man is blest that doth endure temptation
For when he's try'd, the crown of God's salvation,
The which the Lord hath promised to give
To them that love him, that man shall receive.
Let no man be possest with a persuasion,
To say, when he falls under a temptation,
That God's the cause; for with no evil can
God be tempted, nor tempts he any man.
But every man is tempted when he's drawn
Away, and by his lusts prevail'd upon;
Then when lust hath conceiv'd, it ushereth
In sin, and sin when finished brings death.
Err not, my brethren, whom I dearly love,
Each good and perfect gift is from above,
Down from th' original of lights descending,
With whom's no change, nor shadow thereto tending,
According to his own good pleasure, he
Begat us with the word of truth, that we
Should as the first fruits of his creatures be.
Wherefore, beloved brethren, I entreat
You to be swift to hear, and slow to speak,
And slow to wrath, for wrath cannot incline
The sons of men to righteousness divine.
Wherefore avoiding ev'ry filthiness,
And superfluity of naughtiness:
Receive with meekness the engrafted word,
Which can salvation to your souls afford.
But be ye doers of the word each one,
And not deceive yourselves to hear alone;
For he that hears the word and doth it not,
Is like unto a man that hath forgot
What kind of man he was, tho' in a glass
He just before beheld his nat'ral face.
But whoso minds the law of liberty
In its perfection, and continually
Abides therein, forgets not what he's heard,
But doth the work and therein hath reward.
If any man among you seem to be
Religious, he deceives himself if he
Doth not his tongue as with a bit restrain;
And all that man's religion is but vain.
Religion, pure and undefil'd, which is
Acceptable before the Lord, is this:
To visit widows and the fatherless,
In time of their affliction or distress;
And so to regulate his conversation,
As to be spotless in his generation.

CHAP. II.

Faith of the Lord of glory, Jesus Christ,
Doth with respect of persons not consist;
For if, my brethren, when there shall come in
To your assembly one with a gold ring,
In goodly clothes, and there shall also be
Another man that's meanly cloth'd, and ye
Shall have respect to him in rich attire,
And say unto him, come thou, sit up higher;
And bid the poor man stand or sit below,
Are ye not partial then, and plainly show,
That you do judge amiss in what you do?
Hearken, my brethren, hath not God elected
The poor, who by this world have been rejected;
Yet rich in faith, and of that kingdom heirs,
Which God will give his foll'wers to be theirs?
But you, my brethren, do the poor despise.
Do not the rich men o'er you tyrannise;
And hale ye to their courts; that worthy name
By which you're call'd do not they blaspheme?
Then if ye do the royal law fulfil,
To love thy neighbour as thyself, 'tis well,
According to the scripture; but if ye
Shall have respect to persons, ye shall be
Guilty of sin, and by the law condemn'd,
As such who have its righteousness contemn'd.
For he that shall but in one point offend,
Breaks the whole law, whate'er he may pretend.
For he that doth forbid adultery,
Forbids likewise all acts of cruelty.
Now tho' thou be not an adulterer,
Yet if thou kill, thou shalt thy judgment bear.
So speak and do as those men that shall be
Judg'd by the perfect law of liberty:
For he shall judgment without mercy know;
That to his neighbour doth no mercy show;
And mercy triumphs against judgment too.
Brethren what profit is't if a man saith
That he hath faith, and hath not works; can faith
Save him? If any of the brotherhood
Be destitute of clothes or daily food,
And one of you shall say, Depart in peace,
Be warned or be ye fill'd ne'ertheless.
Ye do not furnish them with what they need,
Wat boots it? Thus faith without works is dead.
Yea may a man say, thou dost faith profess,
And I good works, to me thy faith express
Without thy works, and I will plainly show
My faith unto thee by the works I do.
Thou dost believe there is one God, 'tis true,
The devils do believe and tremble too.
But wilt thou know, vain man, that faith is dead,
Which with good works is not accompany'd.
Was not our father Abraham justify'd
By works, and by the same his faith was try'd;
When he his Isaac to the altar brought;
Seest thou how with his works his faith then wrought?
And with his works he perfected his faith?
And so the scripture was fulfill'd, which saith,
Abraham believed God, and 'twas imputed
For righteousness, and he God's friend reputed.
Thus may you see, that by works ev'ry one
Is justify'd, and not by faith alone.
Thus was the harlot Rahab justify'd
By works, when she the messengers did hide,
And by another way their feet did guide.
For as the body's dead without the spirit,
So aith without works never can inherit.

CHAP. III.

Affect not, brethren, superiority,
As knowing that we shall receive thereby
The greater condemnation in the end:
For we in many things do all offend.
Who doth not with his tongue offend, he can
Guide his whole body, he's a perfect man.
Behold, in horses' mouths we bridles put,
To rule and turn their bodies quite about.
Behold likewise the ships, which tho' they be
Of mighty bulk, and thro' the raging sea
Are driv'n by the strength of winds, yet they
By a small helm the pilot's will obey.
Ev'n so the tongue of man, which tho' it be
But a small member, in a high degree
It boasts of things. Behold, we may remark
How great a matter's kindled by a spark.
The tongue's a fire, a world of ill, which plac'd
Among the members, often has disgrac'd
All the whole body, firing the whole frame
Of nature, and is kindl'd by hell flame.
All kind of beasts and birds that can be nam'd,
Serpents and fishes, are and have been tam'd
By mankind; but the tongue can no man tame,
A stubborn evil full of deadly bane.
We therewith God the Father bless, and we
Therewith curse men made like the Deity:
Blessing and cursing from the same mouth flow,
These things, my brethren, ought not to be so.
Is any fountain of so strange a nature,
At once to send forth sweet and bitter water?
Can olives, brethren, on a fig-tree grow,
Or figs on vines? no more can water flow
From the same fountain sweet and bitter too.
He that's endu'd with wisdom and discretion
Amongst you, let that may by the profession
Of meekness, wisely give a demonstration,
Of all his works, from a good conversation.
But if your hearts are full of bitterness
And strife, boast not, nor do the truth profess.
This wisdom is not from above descending,
But earthly, sensual, and to evil tending:
For where there's strife and envying there's confusion
And ev'ry evil work in the conclusion.
But the true wisdom that is from above,
Is, in the first place, pure, then full of love,
Then gentle and entreated easily,
Next merciful, without partiality,
Full of good fruits, without hypocrisy.
And what is more, the fruits of righteousness
Is sown in peace, of them that do make peace.

CHAP. IV.

From whence come wars and fights, come they not hence,
Ev'n from th' inordinate concupiscence
That in your members prompts to variance?
You lust and have not, kill and desire to have;
But ne'ertheless obtain not what you crave.
With war and fighting ye contend, yet have not
The things which you desire, because you crave not;
Ye crave but don't receive, the reason's just,
Ye crave amiss to spend it on your lust.
You that live in adultery, know not ye
The friendship of the world is enmity
With God? He is God's enemy therefore
That doth the friendship of the world adore.
Do ye think that th' scripture saith in vain,
The spirit that lusts to hate, doth in you reign?
But he bestows more grace, wherefore he says,
God scorns the proud, but doth the humble raise.
Unto the Lord therefore submissive be,
Resist the devil and he'll from you flee.
Draw nigh to God, and he'll to you draw nigh.
Make clean your hands you sinners, purify
Your hearts you double-minded, weep and mourn,
And be afflicted, let your laughter turn
To sorrow, and your joy to sadness: stoop
Before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
My brethren, speak not evil of each other;
He that doth judge and speak ill of his brother,
Doth judge and speak ill of the law; therefore
If thou dost judge the law, thou art no more
A doer of the same, but dost assume
The judgment-seat, and art thyself become
A judge thereof. There is but one law-giver,
That's able to destroy and to deliver;
Who then art thou that dost condemn thy neighbour?
Go to now, you that say, to such a place
To-morrow will we go, and for the space
Of one whole year, or so, will there remain,
And buy and sell, and get great store of gain:
Whereas ye know not what a day may do.
For what's the life of man? Ev'n like unto
A vapour, which, tho' for a while it may
Appear, it quickly vanisheth away.
So that ye ought to say, If God permit
Us life and health, we will accomplish it.
But now ye glory in your confidence,
Such glorying is of evil consequence.
He therefore that doth know, and doth not act
The thing that's good, doth guilt thereby contract.

CHAP. V.[13]

Go to now, O ye rich men, howl and cry,
Because of your approaching misery:
Your riches are corrupted, and the moths
Have ent'red, and have eaten up your clothes.
Your gold and silver's canker'd, and the rust
Thereof, shall be an evidence that's just
Against you, and like fire your flesh devour:
Against the last days ye have heap'd up store.
The hire of them that reaped down your field,
The which by you is wrongfully withheld.
Cries, and the voice thereof hath reach'd the ears
Ev'n of the God of sabbath, and he hears.
Your lives in pleasure ye on earth have led,
And as in days of slaughter nourished
Your wanton hearts, and have condemn'd and slain
The just, and he doth not resist again.
Be patient therefore, brethren, ev'n unto
The coming of the Lord: behold, ev'n so
The husbandman expecteth patiently
The precious increase of the earth to see,
With patience waiting till he doth obtain
The showers of early and of latter rain.
So be ye patient, fixing stedfastly
Your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.
Grieve not each other, brethren, lest ye bear
The condemnation;[14] lo! the judge stands near.
The prophets, brethren, who all heretofore
In the name of the Lord their witness bore,
Take for examples in their sufferings
And patience: they that endure such things,
Ye know are counted blest. Have ye not read
Of Job, how patiently he suffered?
Have ye not seen in him what was God's end;
How he doth pity and great love extend?
My brethren, but above all things forbear,
By heav'n or earth, or otherwise to swear;
But let your yea be yea, your nay be nay,
Lest ye become reprovable I say.
Let him sing psalms that's merry; he that's griev'd,
Let him by prayer seek to be reliev'd.
If any of you by sickness be distress'd,
Let him the elders of the church request
That they would come and pray for him a while;
Anointing him in the Lord's name with oil;
So shall the pray'r that is of faith restore
The sick, and God shall raise him as before.
And all th' offences which he hath committed
Shall be forgiv'n, and he shall be acquitted.
Confess your faults each one unto his brother,
And put up supplications for each other,
That so you may be heal'd; the fervency
Of just men's prayers prevails effectually.
Elias was a man as frail as we are,
And he was earnest with the Lord in pray'r,
That there might be no rain, and for the space
Of three years and six months no rain there was:
And afterward, when he again made suit,
The heav'n gave rain, the earth brought forth her fruit.
If any one shall from the truth desert,
And one, my brethren, shall that man convert;
Let him be sure, that he that doth recall
The poor backsliding sinner from his fall,
Shall save a soul from death, and certainly
Shall hide a multitude of sins thereby.



FOOTNOTES:

1. Grace Abounding, No. 3.

2. George Herbert, in that admirable poem called 'The Temple,'
introduces his reader tot he church porch thus:--


'Thou, whose sweet youth and early hopes enhance
Thy rate and price, and mark thee for a treasure;
Hearken unto a verser, who may chance
Rhyme thee to good, and make a bait of pleasure.
A verse may find him, who a sermon flies,
And turn delight into a sacrifice.'


3. 'An husband,' c. i. 12.

4. 'Set abroach,' in a posture to run out, or yield the liquor
contained.--Ed.

5. 'An ephah,' a measure containing three pecks and three
pints.--Calmet.

6. Similar to Christian's exclamation, when calling to Faithful
to stop and bear him company. See Pilgrim's Progress, Part 1st.

7. These lines, and those on the next page, 'The eye's the light
o' th' body,' remind one of Bunyan's style in his Apology for
the Pilgrim's Progress,--

'Dost thou love picking meat? Or would'st thou see A man i' th'
clouds, and hear him speak to thee?'--Ed.

8. A cover, a booth, bower, or hut made of the boughs of trees.--Ed.

9. 'He owes,' a contraction for 'he owneth.'--Ed.

10. The word translated 'divine,' means to eye subtly, to search, to
try. Verse 5 may be rendered, 'And he will search deeply for it';
and in verse 15, 'Know ye not that a man like me would search deeply,'
alluding to the certainty of detection, but not by divination.--Ed.

11. 'So naught,' so corrupt, bad, or worthless.--Ed.

12. The mourning of Egypt.--Ed.

13. By a typographical error, in the original edition, it is
misprinted CHAP. XLVI.

14. How admirably does Bunyan enlarge upon this in his 'Peaceable
principles yet true.'

***

An Exposition on the FIRST TEN CHAPTERS OF GENESIS, And Part of
the Eleventh

An unfinished commentary on the Bible, found among the author's
papers after his death, in his own handwriting; and published in
1691, by Charles Doe, in a folio volume of the works of John Bunyan.

ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR

Being in company with an enlightened society of Protestant dissenters
of the Baptist denomination, I observed to a doctor of divinity,
who was advancing towards his seventieth year, that my time had
been delightfully engaged with John Bunyan's commentary on Genesis.
"What," said the D.D., with some appearance of incredulity, "Bunyan
a commentator--upon Genesis!! Impossible! Well, I never heard of
that work of the good Bunyan before. Why, where is it to be found?"
Yes, it is true that he has commented on that portion of sacred
scripture, containing the cosmogony of creation--the fall of man--the
first murder--the deluge--and other facts which have puzzled the
most learned men of every age; and he has proved to be more learned
than all others in his spiritual perceptions. He graduated at a
higher university--a university unshackled by human laws, conventional
feelings, and preconceived opinions. His intense study of the
Bible, guided by the teaching of the Holy Spirit, enabled him to
throw a new and beautiful light upon objects which are otherwise
obscure. Oh! that young ministers, while attaining valuable
book learning, may see the necessity of taking a high degree in,
and of never forgetting this Bible university! Reader, is it not
surprizing, that such a treatise should have remained comparatively
hidden for more than one hundred and fifty years. It has been
reprinted in many editions of Bunyan's works: but in all, except
the first, with the omission of the scripture references; and with
errors of so serious a character as if it was not intended to be
read. Even in printing the text of Genesis 7:7 Noah's three sons
do not enter the ark! although in 8:16 they are commanded to go
forth out of the ark. It is now presented to the public exactly
as the author left it, with the addition of notes, which it is
hoped will illustrate and not encumber the text.

This exposition is evidently the result of long and earnest study
of the holy scriptures. It is the history of the creation and of
the flood explained and spiritualized, and had it been originally
published in that form and under a proper title, it would most probably
have become a very popular work. The author's qualifications for
writing this commentary were exclusively limited to his knowledge
of holy writ. To book learning he makes no pretensions. He tells
us that in his youth "God put it into my parents hearts to put me
to school, to learn to read and write as other poor men's children;
though, to my shame, I confess, I did soon lose that little I
learnt even almost utterly." In after life, his time was occupied
in obtaining a livelihood by labour. When enduring severe mental
conflicts, and while he maintained his family by the work of
his hands, he was an acceptable pastor, and extensively useful
in itinerant labours of love in the villages round Bedford. His
humility, when he had used three common Latin words, prompted him
to say in the margin, "The Latine I borrow." And this unlettered
mechanic, when he might have improved himself in book wisdom, was
shut up within the walls of a prison for nearly thirteen years,
for obeying God, only solaced with his Bible and Fox's Book of
Martyrs. Yet he made discoveries relative to the creation, which
have been very recently again published by a learned philosopher,
who surprised and puzzled the world with his vestiges of creation.
Omitting the fanciful theories of the vestige philosopher, his
two great facts, proved by geological discoveries, are--

I. That when the world was created and set in motion, it was upon
principles by which it is impelled on to perfection--a state of
irresistible progress in improvement. This is the theory of Moses:
and Bunyan's exposition is, that all was finished, even to the
creation of all the souls which were to animate the human race,
and then God rested from his work.

II. The second geological discovery is that the world was far
advanced towards perfection producing all that was needful for
human life, before man was created. Upon this subject, Bunyan's
words are--"God shews his respect to this excellent creature, in
that he first provideth for him before he giveth him his being.
He bringeth him not to an empty house, but to one well furnished
with all kind of necessaries, having beautified the heaven and the
earth with glory, and all sorts of nourishment for his pleasure
and sustenance." But the most pious penetration is exhibited in
the spiritualizing of the creation and of the flood--every step
produces some type of that new creation, or regeneration, without
which no soul can be fitted for heaven. The dim twilight before the
natural sun was made, is typical of the state of those who believed
before Christ, the Sun of righteousness, arose and was manifested.
The fixed stars are emblems of the church, whose members all
shine, but with different degrees of lustre--sometimes eclipsed,
and at others mistaken for transient meteors. The whales and lions
are figures of great persecutors. But the most singular idea of all
is, that the moral degradation of human nature before the flood,
was occasioned by hypocrisy and persecution for conscience sake,
arising from governors interfering with matters of faith and
worship; in fact, that a STATE CHURCH occasioned the deluge--and
since that time has been the fruitful source of the miseries and
wretchedness that has afflicted mankind. His prediction of the
outpouring of the Spirit in the conversion of sinners, when the
church shall be no longer enthralled and persecuted by the state,
is remarkable. "O thou church of God in England, which art now
upon the waves of affliction and temptation, when thou comest out
of the furnace, if thou come out at the bidding of God, there shall
come out with thee, the fowl, the beast, and abundance of creeping
things. O Judah, he hath set an harvest for thee, when I returned
the captivity of my people." May this prediction soon be verified,
and the temporal government no longer vex and torment the church
by interfering with spiritual things.

It is remarkable that of the vast number of pious and enlightened
mechanics who adorn this country and feed its prosperity, so few
read the extraordinary writings of John Bunyan, a brother mechanic;
for with the exception of the Pilgrim's Progress and Holy War,
they are comparatively little known. His simple but illustrative
commentary--his book of Antichrist--his solemn and striking treatise
on the resurrection and final judgment--in fact, all his works,
are peculiarly calculated to inform the minds of the millions--to
reform bad habits, and, under the divine blessing, to purify the
soul with that heavenly wisdom which has in it the promise of the
life that now is as well as of that which is to come. It is also
a fact which ought to be generally known, that those preachers who
have edited Bunyan's works and have drunk into his spirit, have
been most eminently blessed in their ministry; Wilson, Whitefield,
and Ryland, can never be forgotten. If the thousands of godly
preachers who are scattered over our comparatively happy island
were to take Bunyan's mode of expounding scripture as their
pattern, it would increase their usefulness, and consequently
their happiness, in the great work of proclaiming and enforcing
the doctrines of the gospel.

GEO OFFOR.

AN EXPOSITION ON THE FIRST TEN CHAPTERS OF GENESIS, AND PART OF
THE ELEVENTH

In the first edition of this commentary, a series of numbers from
1 to 294 were placed in the margin, the use of which the editor
could not discover; probably the work was written on as many scraps
of paper, thus numbered to direct the printer. They are omitted,
lest, among divisions and subdivisions, they should puzzle the
reader.

CHAPTER II. Of God.

God is a Spirit (John 4:24), eternal (Deu 33:27), infinite (Rom
1:17-20), incomprehensible (Job 11:7), perfect, and unspeakably
glorious in his being, attributes, and works (Gen 17:51; Isa 6:3;
Exo 33:20). "The eternal God." "Do not I fill heaven and earth?
saith the Lord" (Jer 23:24). "Neither is there any creature that
is not manifest in his sight" (Heb 4:13; Pro 15:11).

In his attributes of wisdom, power, justice, holiness, mercy, &c.,
he is also inconceivably perfect and infinite, not to be comprehended
by things in earth, or things in heaven; known in the perfection
of his being only to himself. The seraphims cannot behold him,
but through a veil; no man can see him in his perfection and live.

His attributes, though apart laid down in the word of God, that
we, being weak, might the better conceive of his eternal power
and godhead; yet in him they are without division; one glorious
and eternal being. Again, though sometimes this, as of wisdom, or
that, as of justice and mercy, is most manifest in his works and
wonders before men; yet every such work is begun and completed by
the joint concurrence of all his attributes. No act of justice is
without his will, power, and wisdom; no act of mercy is against
his justice, holiness and purity. Besides, no man must conceive
of God, as if he consisted of these attributes, as our body doth
of its members, one standing here, another there, for the completing
personal subsistence. For though by the word we may distinguish,
yet may we not divide them, or presume to appoint them their
places in the Godhead. Wisdom is in his justice, holiness is in
his power, justice is in his mercy, holiness is in his love, power
is in his goodness (1 John 1:9, Num 14:17,18).

Wherefore, he is in all his attributes almighty, all-wise, holy and
powerful. Glory is in his wisdom, glory is in his holiness, glory
is in his mercy, justice, and strength; and "God is love" (1 John
4:16).[1]

II. Of the Persons or Subsistances in the Godhead.

The Godhead is but one, yet in the Godhead there are three. "There
are three that can bear record in heaven" (1 John 5:7-9). These
three are called "the Father, the Son [Word], and the Holy Spirit";
each of which is really, naturally and eternally God: yet there
is but one God. But again, because the Father is of himself, the
Son by the Father, and the Spirit from them both, therefore to
each, the scripture not only applieth, and that truly, the whole
nature of the Deity, but again distinguisheth the Father from
the Son, and the Spirit from them both; calling the Father HE, by
himself; the Son HE, by himself; the Spirit HE, by himself. Yea,
the Three of themselves, in their manifesting to the church what
she should believe concerning this matter, hath thus expressed
the thing: "Let us make man in OUR image, after OUR likeness" (Gen
1:26). Again, "The man is become as one of US" (Gen 3:22). Again,
"Let US go down, and there confound their language" (Gen 11:6,7).
And again, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for US?" (Isa 6:8).
To these general expressions might be added, That Adam heard the
voice of the Lord God walking in the midst of the garden: Genesis
3:8. Which voice John will have, to be one of the Three, calling
that which Moses here saith is the voice, the word of God: "In the
beginning," saith he, "was the word": the voice which Adam heard
walking in the midst of the garden. This word, saith John, "was
with God," this "word was God. The same was in the beginning with
God" (John 1:1,2). Marvellous language! Once asserting the unity
of essence, but twice insinuating a distinction of substances
therein. "The word was with God, the word was God, the same was
in the beginning with God." Then follows, "All things were made
by him," the word, the second of the three.

Now the godly in former ages have called these three, thus in the
Godhead, Persons or Subsistances; the which, though I condemn not,
yet choose rather to abide by scripture phrase, knowing, though
the other may be good and sound, yet the adversary must needs more
shamelessly spurn and reject, when he doth it against the evident
text.

To proceed the, First, There are Three. Second, These three are
distinct.

First, By this word Three, is intimated the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost, and they are said to be three, 1. Because those
appellations that are given them in scripture, demonstrate them so
to be, to wit, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 2. Because their acts
one towards another discover them so to be.

Secondly, These three are distinct. 1. So distinct as to be more
than one, only: There are three. 2. So distinct as to subsist
without depending. The Father is true God, the Son is true God,
the Spirit is true God. Yet the Father is one, the Son is one,
the Spirit is one: The Father is one of himself, the Son is one
by the Father, the Spirit is one from them both. Yet the Father is
not above the Son, nor the Spirit inferior to either: The Father
is God, the Son is God, the Spirit is God.

Among the three then there is not superiority. 1. Not as to time;
the Father is from everlasting, so is the Son, so is the Spirit.
2. Not as to nature, the Son being of the substance of the Father,
and the Spirit of the substance of them both. 3. The fulness of
the Godhead is in the Father, is in the Son, and is in the Holy
Ghost.

The Godhead then, though it can admit of a Trinity, yet it admitteth
not of inferiority in that Trinity: if otherwise, then less or more
must be there, and so either plurality of gods, or something that
is not God: so then, Father, Son and Spirit are in the Godhead,
yet but one God; each of these is God over all, yet no Trinity of
Gods, but one God in the Trinity.

Explication.--The Godhead then is common to the three, but the
three themselves abide distinct in that Godhead: Distinct, I say,
as Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit. This is manifest further by
these several positions.

First, Father and Son are relatives, and must needs therefore have
their relation as such: A Father begetteth, a Son is begotten.

Proof.--"Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? Who
hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who hath bound the waters in
a garment? What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou
canst tell?" (Pro 30:4).

"God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son," &c.
(John 3:16).

"The Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world" (1 John
4:14).

Secondly, The Father then cannot be that Son he begat, nor the Son
that Father that begat him, but must be distinct as such.

Proof.--"I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that
sent me beareth witness of me" (John 8:17,18).

"I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world"; again,
"I leave the world, and go to the Father" (John 16:28).

"The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto
the Son: That all men should honour the Son, even as they honour
the Father" (John 5:22,23).

Thirdly, The Father must have worship as a Father, and the Son as
a Son.

Proof.--They that worship the Father must worship him "in spirit
and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him" (John
4:23,24).

And of the Son he saith, and "when he bringeth in the first begotten
into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship
him" (Heb 1:6).

Fourthly, The Father and Son have really these distinct, but
heavenly, relative properties, that discover them, as such, to be
two as well as one.

Proof.--"The Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things"
(John 5:20).

"Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life,
that I might take it again" (John 10:17). The Father sent the Son;
the Father commanded the Son; the Son prayed to the Father, and
did always the things that pleased him.

The absurdities that flow from the denial of this are divers, some
of which hereunder follow.

1. Absurdity.--It maketh void all those scriptures that do affirm
the doctrine; some of which you have before.

2. Absurdity.--If in the Godhead there be but one, not three, then
the Father, Son, or the Spirit, must needs be that one, if any one
only: so then the other two are nothing. Again, If the reality of
a being be neither in the Father, Son, nor Spirit, as such, but
in the eternal deity, without consideration of Father, Son, and
Spirit as three; then neither of the three are anything but notions
in us, or manifestations of the Godhead; or nominal distinctions;
so related by the word; but if so, then when the Father sent the
Son, and the Father and Son the Spirit, one notion sent another,
one manifestation sent another. This being granted, this unavoidably
follows, there was no Father to beget a Son, no Son to be sent to
save us, no Holy Ghost to be sent to comfort us, and to guide us
into all the truth of the Father and Son, &c. The most amounts but
to this, a notion sent a notion, a distinction sent a distinction,
or one manifestation sent another. Of this error these are the
consequences, we are only to believe in notions and distinctions,
when we believe in the Father and the Son; and so shall have no
other heaven and glory, than notions and nominal distinctions can
furnish us withal.

3. Absurdity.--If Father and Son, &c., be no otherwise three, than
as notions, names, or nominal distinctions; then to worship these
distinctly, or together, as such, is to commit most gross and
horrible idolatry: For albeit we are commanded to fear that great
and dreadful name, The Lord our God; yet to worship a Father, a
Son, and Holy Spirit in the Godhead, as three, as really three as
one, is by this doctrine to imagine falsely of God, and so to break
the second commandment: but to worship God under the consideration
of Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, and to believe them as really
three as one when I worship, being the sum and substance of the
doctrine of the scriptures of God, there is really substantially
three in the eternal Godhead.

But to help thee a little in thy study on this deep.

1. Thou must take heed when thou readest, there is in the Godhead,
Father, and Son, &c., that thou do not imagine about them according
to thine own carnal and foolish fancy; for no man can apprehend
this doctrine but in the light of the word and Spirit of God. "No
man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the
Father, save the Son; and he to whom the Son will reveal him" (Matt
11:27). If therefore thou be destitute of the Spirit of God, thou
canst not apprehend the truth of this mystery as it is in itself,
but will either by thy darkness be driven to a denial thereof; or
if thou own it, thou wilt (that thy acknowledgment notwithstanding)
falsely imagine about it.

2. If thou feel thy thoughts begin to wrestle about this truth,
and to struggle concerning this one against another; take heed
of admitting of such a question, How can this thing be? For here
is no room for reason to make it out, here is only room to believe
it is a truth. You find not one of the prophets propounding an
argument to prove it; but asserting it, they let it lie, for faith
to take it up and embrace it.

"The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen" (2 Cor 13:14).

III. Of the Creation of the World (Gen 1).

The Apostle saith, That "to us there is but one God, the Father,
of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom are all things, and we by him" (1 Cor 8:6). "God that
made the world" (Acts 17:24). "All things were made by him; and
without him was not any thing made that was made" (John 1:3). This
world therefore had a beginning, and was created by the God of
heaven. Which work, because it is wonderful, and discovereth much
of the greatness, of the wisdom and power of the eternal Godhead,
it behoveth such poor mortals as we to behold these works of the
mighty God, that thereby we may see how great he is, and be made
to cry out, What is man! [2] (Psa 8:3,4)

Now in the creation of the world we may consider several things;
as, What was the order of God in this work? And, whether there
was a secret or mystery in this work containing the truth of some
higher thing? For the first of these:

Of the Order of God in Making the World.

[THE HEAVEN.]

Although God be indeed omnipotent, and not only can, but doth
do whatsoever he will; and though to do his works he needeth not
length of time; yet it pleased him best, in the creation of the
world (though it could, had it pleased him, have done all by one
only word) to proceed by degrees from one thing to another, to
the completing of six days' work in the making thereof.

And forasmuch as this work went on by degrees, now this thing,
and then another, it may not be amiss, if in our discourse on
this wonderful work, we begin where God began; and if we can, go
wondering after him who hath thus wrought.

1. The first thing that God made was time; I say, it was time: All
the plain in which he would build this beautiful world; he made
nothing before, but in the beginning: "In the beginning God created
the heaven and the earth" (Gen 1:1). In the beginning of time.
"For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
that in them is" (Exo 20:11). Therefore the first day must first
have a beginning to be. Whatsoever was before time, was eternal;
but nothing but God himself is eternal, therefore no creature was
before time. Time, therefore, which was indeed the beginning, was
the first of the creatures of God.

2. I think, the second of creatures that the Lord created, were
the holy angels of God, they being called the morning stars, as
created and shining in the morning of the world; and therefore
they are said to be by, when the corner-stone of the universe was
laid; that is, when he "laid the foundations" of the world: Then
"the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted
for joy" (Job 5:4-7).

3. I think the third thing that the Lord created, was these large
and copious heavens; for they are mentioned with respect to their
being before the earth, or any visible creature. "In the beginning
God created the heavens" (Gen 1:1), &c. Neither do I think that
the heavens were made of that confused chaos that afterwards we
read of. It is said, he stretched out the heavens as a curtain, and
with his hand he hath spanned the heavens (Psa 104:2; Isa 40:22;
48:13).; intimating, that they were not taken out of that formless
heap, but were immediately formed by his power. Besides, the
Holy Ghost, treating of the creating of heaven and earth, he only
saith, The earth was void, and without form; but no such thing of
the heavens.

[THE EARTH.]

4. The fourth thing that God created, it was (in mine opinion) that
chaos, or first matter, with which he in the six days framed this
earth, with its appurtenances; for the visible things that are
here below, seem to me to be otherwise put into being and order,
than time, the angels, and the heavens, they being created in
their own simple essence by themselves: But the things that are
visibly here below, whatever their essence and nature be, they
were formed of that first deformed chaos. "In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth, and the earth was without form
and void" (Gen 1:1,2). He saith not so of the heavens; they, as
I said, were at first stretched forth as a curtain; indeed they
were afterwards garnished with the beauty which we now behold;
but otherwise they had, at their first instant of being, that form
which now they have. This seems clear by the antithesis which the
Holy Ghost put between them, God created the heaven and the earth,
but "the earth was without form and void" (Gen 1:2). The earth
was without form, &c., without order; things were together on a
confused heap; the waters were not divided from the earth, neither
did those things appear which are now upon the face of the earth;
as man, and beast, fish, fowls, trees, and herbs; all these did
afterwards shew themselves, as the word of God gave them being, by
commanding their appearance, in what form, order, place and time
he in himself had before determined; but all, I say, took their
matter and substance of that first chaos, which he in the first
day of the world had commanded to appear, and had given being
to: And therefore 'tis said, God said, Let the earth bring forth
grass, herbs, trees, &c., (v 12) and that the waters brought forth
the fish, and fowl, yea, even to the mighty whales (vv 21,22).
Also the earth brought forth cattle, and creeping things (v 24).
And that God made man of the dust of the ground (3:19). All these
things therefore were made of, or caused by his word distinctly
to appear, and be after its kind, of that first matter which he
had before created by his word. Observe therefore, That the matter
of all earthly things was made at the same instant, but their
forming, &c., was according to the day in which God gave them
their being, in their own order and kind. And hence it is said,
that after that first matter was created, and found without form
and void, that the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters;
that is to work, and cause those things to appear in their own
essence and form, which, as to matter and substance, was before
created: Wherefore it follows, And God said, Let there be light;
and God divided the light from the darkness, &c. Now he set to
putting in frame that which before lay in disorder and confusion:
And this was a great part of the six days' work; I say, a great
part, but not all; for (as I said) before that time, the angels,
and the heavens were made; yea, after the beginning of the morning
of the first day. I am of the belief, that other things also, that
were formed after, were not made of that first chaos, as the sun,
the moon, the stars, the light, the souls of men, and possibly
the air, &c. The sun, and moon, and stars, are said to be made
the fourth day, yet not of the body of heaven itself, much less,
in my opinion, of any earthly matter: God made them, and set them
in the firmament of heaven (vv 16,17). So the light that was made
before, it seems to be a thing created after the heavens and the
earth were created: Created, I say, as a thing that wanted a being
before, any otherwise, than in the decree of God: and God said,
Let there be light; Let it have a being (v 3). And so, though
the body of man was made of the substance of earth, yet as to his
soul, it is said, God breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life, and man became a living soul (2:7).

Whether there was a secret or mystery in this work, containing the
truth of some higher thing.

Though God in very deed, by his eternal power, created heaven and
earth of things that do not appear, we that are Christians believe:
yet in this his wonderful work, neither his will or understanding
did here terminate, or make a stop; but being infinite in wisdom,
he made them, that both as to matter and manner, they might present
unto us, as in a mystery, some higher and more excellent thing;
in this wisdom he made them all. And hence it is that other things
are also called a creation: As, 1. The essential conversion of a
sinner (2 Cor 5:17). 2. The recovery of the church from a degenerate
state (Rev 21:5).

And therefore, as Moses begins with the creation of the world, so
John begins with the gospel of salvation (Gen 1:1; John 1:1). There
is also besides many excellent things in the manner and order of the
creation of the world, held forth to those that have understanding:
Some of which I may touch upon by way of observation. But to begin
with the first:

The first appearance of this earthy part of the world, is recorded
to be but a formless and void heap or chaos; and such is man before
a new creation: formless, I mean, as to the order of the Testament
of Christ, and void of the holy order thereof: And hence Jeremiah,
when he would set forth the condition of a wicked people, he doth
it under this metaphor: "I beheld [saith he] the earth, and, lo,
it was without form and void" (Jer 4:23). Indeed, the world would
make this a type of Christ; to wit, a man of no form or comeliness
(Isa 53:2). But 'tis only true of themselves; they are without a
New Testament impression upon them; they are void of the sovereign
grace of God. So then the power of God gave the world a being, but
by his word he set it in form and beauty; even as by his power he
gives a being to man, but by his word he giveth him New Testament
framing and glory (Eph 2:10-13). This is still followed by that
which follows:

And darkness was upon the face of the deep (v 2).

The Deep here, might be a type of the heart of man before conversion;
and so Solomon seems to intimate. Now as the darkness of this world
did cover the face of this first chaos; so spiritual darkness the
heart of the sons of men: and hence they are said to be darkened,
to be in darkness, yea, to be very darkness itself.

"And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters."

A blessed emblem of the word of God in the matter of regeneration;
for as the first chaos remained without form, and void, until the
Spirit of God moved to work upon it, and by working, to put this
world into frame and order; so man, as he comes into the world,
abides a confused lump, an unclean thing; a creature without New
Testament order, until by the Spirit of the Lord he is transformed
into the image of Jesus Christ (Gal 1:15).

"And the Spirit of God moved upon the face."

Solomon compares the heart to a man's face; because as in the face
may be discerned whether there is anger or otherwise; so by the
inclinations of the heart are discovered the truth of the condition of
the man, as to his state either for heaven or hell. And besides,
as the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters; so in
the work of our conversion, the Spirit of God beginneth with the
heart of the sons of men; because the heart is the main fort (Acts
2:37). Now if the main fort be not taken, the adversary is still
capable of making continual resistance. Therefore God first
conquers the heart; therefore the Spirit of God moveth upon the
face of our heart, when he cometh to convert us from Satan to God.

"And God said, Let there be light."

This is the first thing with which God began the order of the
creation; to wit, light, "Let there be light": From which many
profitable notes may be gathered, as to the order of God in the
salvation of the soul. As,

1. When the Holy Ghost worketh upon us, and in us, in order to
a new creation; he first toucheth our understanding, that great
peace of the heart, with his spiritual illumination (Matt 4:16).
His first word, in order to our conversion, is, Let there be light:
light, to see their state by nature; light, to see the fruits and
effects of sin; light, to see the truth and worth of the merits
of Jesus Christ; light, to see the truth and faithfulness of God,
in keeping promise and covenant with them that embrace salvation
upon the blessed terms of the gospel of peace (Heb 10:32). Now
that this word, Let there be light, was a semblance of the first
work of the Holy Ghost upon the heart, compare it with that
of Paul to the Corinthians; "For God, who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness," that is, at the beginning of the world,
"hath shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ" (2 Cor 4:6).

2. "And God said, Let there be light." As here, the light of this
world; so in conversion, the light of the New Testament of Christ,
it comes by the word of God. No word, no light: therefore the
apostle saith, He "hath brought life and immortality to light
through the gospel" (2 Tim 1:10). And therefore Paul saith again,
That salvation is manifest through preaching, through the expounding
or opening of the word of faith.

3. "And God said, Let there be light; and there was light": He
spake the word, and it was done; all that darkness that before
did cover the face of the deep, could not now hinder the being of
light. So neither can all the blindness and ignorance that is in
the heart of man, hinder the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ (Rev 3:7). When it pleaseth
God to reveal, it is revealed; when he openeth, none can shut: He
said, Let there be light, and there was light.

And God saw that the light was good. Truly the light is good (saith
Solomon) and a pleasant thing it is for the eye to behold the sun.
It was good, because it was God's creature; and so in the work of
grace that is wrought in our hearts, that light of the new covenant,
it is good, because it is God's work, the work of his good pleasure
(2 Thess 1:11); that good work which he hath not only begun, but
promised to fulfil until the day of Jesus Christ (Phil 1:6).

God saw that the light was good. The darkness that before did cover
the face of the waters, was not a creature of God, but a privation,
or that which was caused by reason that light was not as yet in
the world: so sin, that darkness that might be felt, is not the
workmanship of God in the soul, but that which is the work of the
devil; and that taketh occasion to be, by reason that the true
light, as yet, doth not shine in the soul.

"And God divided the light from the darkness." As Paul saith, What
communion hath light with darkness? they cannot agree to dwell
together (2 Cor 6:14). We see the night still flies before the day,
and dareth not come upon us again, but as the light diminisheth
and conveyeth itself away. So it is in the new creation; before
the light of the glorious gospel of Christ appears, there is night,
all night, in the soul (Eph 5:8): but when that indeed doth shine
in the soul, then for night there is day in the soul: "Ye were
darkness [saith Paul] but now are ye light in the Lord" (v 9): And,
"The darkness is past [saith John] and the true light now shineth"
(1 John 2:8).

"And God divided the light from the darkness."

God took part with the light, and preserved it from the darkness.
By these words, it seems that darkness and light began the quarrel,
before that bloody bout of Cain and Abel (Gal 5:17). The light and
the darkness struggled together, and nothing could divide or part
them but God. Darkness is at implacable enmity with light in the
creation of the world; and so it is in that rare work of regeneration,
the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh; as Peter saith, Fleshly lusts, they war against the soul.
This every Christian feels, and also that which I mentioned before,
namely, That before he be capable of opposing antichrist, with
Abel, in the world, he findeth a struggling in his own soul between
the light and the darkness that is there.

"And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night."

God doth not only distinguish by separating, but also by certain
characters; that things which are distinguished and separate, may
to us be the better known; he did so here in the work of creating
the world, and he doth so also in the great concern of man's
eternal happiness. The place of felicity is called heaven: The
place of torment is called hell: that which leads to hell is called
sin, transgression, iniquity, and wickedness; that which leads to
heaven, righteousness, holiness, goodness and uprightness: even as
in these types God called the light day, of which the godly are
the children (1 Thess 5:5); but the darkness he called night, of
which all ungodly men are the inhabiters and children also. Thus
after the Spirit of God had moved upon the face of the waters;
after God had commanded the light to shine, and had divided between
the light and the darkness, and had characterized them by their
proper names, he concludes the first day's work, "And the evening
and the morning were the first day." In which conclusion there is
wrapped up a blessed gospel-mystery; for God, by concluding the
first day here, doth shew us how we ought to determine that one
is made indeed a Christian: Even then when the Spirit of God hath
moved upon the face of the heart, when he hath commanded that light
should be there, when he divideth between, or setteth the light
at variance with the darkness; and when the soul doth receive the
characters of both, to observe them, and carry it to each according
to the mouth of God.

"And God saith, Let there be a firmament" (v 6).

This firmament he calleth heaven (v 8). Now this firmament, or
heaven, was to make a separation, or to divide between the waters
and the waters (v 7); To separate, I say, the waters from the
waters; the waters which were under the firmament, from the waters
which were above the firmament. Now by waters is signified in
the scriptures many things, as afflictions, worldly people (Psa
69:1,2), and particularly the saints (Rev 19:6); but in this place
is figured forth, all the people in the world, but so as consisting
of two parts, the children of God, and the children of the wicked
one: They under the heaven, figure out the world, or ungodly:
they above the firmament, the elect and chosen of God. And hence
in scripture the one is called heaven, and the other is called
earth, to signify the separation and difference that there is
between the one and the other.

"And God made the firmament, and divided the waters--from the
waters."

Indeed the world think that this separation comes, or is made,
through the captiousness of the preacher: But in truth it is the
handy work of God; And God made the firmament, and God divided,
&c. "I," saith he, "will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed" (Gen 3:15). The good seed are
the children of the kingdom of God, but the bad are the children
of the wicked one (Matt 13:38).

"And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under
the firmament, from the waters which were above the firmament:
and it was so" (v 7).

Whatsoever the Lord doth, it abideth for ever (Eccl 3:14). And again,
What he hath made crooked, who can make straight? (Eccl 1:15). He
said it in the beginning, and behold how it hath continued! Yea,
though there hath been endeavours on Satan's part, to mingle his
children with the seed of men; yet it hath not been possible they
should ever cleave one to another, "even as iron is not mixed
with clay" (Dan 2:43). Yea, let me add further, What laws have
been made, what blood hath been shed, what cruelty hath been used,
and what flatteries and lies invented, and all to make these two
waters and people one? And yet all hath failed, and fallen short
of producing the desired effect; for the Lord hath made a firmament,
even heaven itself hath divided between them.

"And God called the firmament heaven. And the evening and the
morning were the second day" (v 8).

After the waters were divided from the waters, God called the cause
of dividing, heaven; and so concluded the second day's work. And
indeed it was a very great work, as in the antitype we feel it to
this very day. Dividing work is difficult work, and he that can,
according to God, completely end and finish it, he need do no more
that day of his life.

"And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so" (v
9).

Although in the second day's work, the waters above the firmament,
and those that be under, are the two peoples, or great families
of the world (Pro 8:31); yet because God would shew us by things
on earth, the flourishing state of those that are his (Hosea 10:12;
Joel 2:21-23; Psa 91:1; Heb 6:7), therefore he here doth express
his mind by another kind of representation of things (Jer 4:3,4):
"And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
unto one place; and let the dry land appear." The waters here
signifying the world; but the fruitful earth, the thrifty church
of God. That the fruitful earth is a figure of the thriving church
of God in this world, is evident from many scriptures, (and there
was nothing but thriftiness till the curse came). And hence it is
said of the church, That she should break the clods of the ground;
that she should sow righteousness, and reap it; that she should not
sow among thorns; that if this be done, the heart is circumcised,
and spiritual fruit shall flow forth, and grow abundantly: And
hence again it is that the officers and eminent ones in the church,
are called vines, trees, and other fruitful plants. And hence it
is said again, When the Lord reigneth, let the earth (that is,
the church) rejoice. That earth which bringeth forth fruit meet
for him by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God. In
all which places, and many more that might be named, the earth is
made a figure of the church of God; and so I count it here in this
place.

"And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered into
one place."

Let them be together: It is not thus of all waters, but of the sea,
which is still here a type of the world. Let them be so together,
that the earth may appear; that the church may be rid of their
rage and tumult, and then she will be fruitful, as it follows in
this first book of Genesis. The church is then in a flourishing
state, when the world is farthest off from her, and when the
roaring of their waves are far away. Now therefore let all the
wicked men be far from thence (Ezra 6:6): The Lord gather these
waters, which in another place are called the doleful creatures,
and birds of prey; Let these, O Lord, be gathered together to
their own places, and be settled in the land of Shinar upon their
own base (Zech 5:11): Then the wilderness and the solitary places
shall be glad for them; that is, for that they are departed thence,
the desert shall rejoice and blossom as a rose (Isa 34 and 35).

"And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of
the waters called he seas: and God saw that it was good" (v 10).

God saw, that to separate the waters from the earth was good: And
so it is, for then have the churches rest. Then doth this earth
bring forth her fruit, as in the 11th and 12th verses may here be
seen.

"And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven"
(v 14).

The wisdom of God, is there to make use of figures and shadows,
even where most fit things, the things under consideration, may be
most fitly demonstrated. The dividing the waters from the waters,
most fitly doth show the work of God in choosing and refusing; by
dividing the waters from the earth, doth show how fruitful God's
earth, the church is, when persecutors are made to be far from
thence.

Wherefore he speaketh not of garnishing of his church until he
comes to this fourth day's work: by his Spirit he hath garnished
the heavens, that most fitly showing the glory of the church.

Let there be lights; to wit, the sun, the moon, and the stars.

The sun is in this place a type of Christ, the Sun of Righteousness:
The moon is a type of the church, in her uncertain condition in
this world: The stars are types of the several saints and officers
in this church. And hence it is that the sun is said not only to
rule, but it, with the moon and stars, to be set for signs, and
for seasons, and for days, and for years, &c. (Rev 1:20). But if
we take the heaven for the church, then how is she beautified,
when the Son of God is placed in the midst of her! (Rev 1:12,13).
And how plainly is her condition made out, even by the changing,
increasing, and diminishing of the moon! And how excellent is that
congregation of men, that for light and glory are figured by the
stars! (Matt 28:20).

From this day's work much might be observed.

First, That forasmuch as the sun was not made before the fourth
day, it is evident there was light in the world before the sun was
created; for in the first day God said, Let there be light, and
there was light. This may also teach us thus much, That before
Christ came in person, there was spiritual light in the saints
of God. And again, That as the sun was not made before the fourth
day of the creation, so Christ should not be born before the
fourth mystical day of the world; for it is evident, that Christ,
the true light of the world, was not born till about four thousand
years after the world was made. Second, As to the moon, there are
four things attending her, which fitly may hold forth the state
of the church. (1.) In that she changeth from an old to a new, we
may conceive, that God by making her so, did it to show he would
one day make a change of his church, from a Jewish to a Gentile
congregation. (2.) In that she increaseth, she showeth the
flourishing state of the church. (3.) In her diminishing, the
diminishing state of the church. (4.) The moon is also sometimes
made to look as red as blood, to show how dreadful and bloody the
suffering of the church is at some certain times.

Third, By the stars, we understand two things. (1.) How innumerable
the saints, those spiritual stars shall be (Heb 11:12). (2.) How
they shall differ each from other in glory (1 Cor 15:41).

"And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven,
to divide the day from the night."

For though before the light was divided from the darkness, yet the
day and night was not so kept within their bounds, as now by these
lights they were: probably signifying, that nothing should be so
clearly distinguished and made appear, as by the sun light of the
gospel of Christ: for by that it is that "the shadows flee away"
(Song 2:17). The light of the sun gathers the day to its hours, both
longer and shorter, and forceth also the night to keep within his
bounds.

"And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night" (v 16).

Signifying, That Christ should be the light and governor of his
church, which are the children of the day; but the church, a light
to the children of the night, that by them they might learn the
mysteries of the kingdom. Saith Christ to his own, "Ye are the light
of the world": And again, "Let your light so shine,--that men may
see," &c., for though they that only walk in the night, cannot see
to walk by the sun, yet by the moon they may. Thus the heaven is
a type of the church, the moon a type of her uncertain state in
this world; the stars are types of her immovable converts; and
their glory, of the differing degrees of theirs, both here, and
in the other world. Much more might be said, but I pass this.

"And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that hath life" (v 20).

The sea, as I said, is a figure of the world; wherefore the creatures
that are in it, of the men of the world (Zech 13:8; Isa 60:5). This
sea bringeth forth small and great beasts, even as the world doth
yield both small and great persecutors, who like the fishes of prey,
eat up and devour what they can of those fish that are of another
condition. Now also out of the world that mystical sea, as fishers
do out of the natural; both Christ and his servants catch mystical
fish, even fish as of the great sea.

In the sea God created great whales, he made them to play therein.

Which whales in the sea are types of the devils in the world:
Therefore as the devil is called, the prince of this world; so the
whale is called, king over all the children of pride (Job 41:33,34).

"And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after
his kind" (v 24).

Of the beginning of this sixth day's work that may be said which
is said of the fishes, and the rest of the sea; for as there is
variety of fish in the one, so of beasts and cattle in the other,
who also make a prey of their fellows, as the fishes do; a most apt
representation of the nature and actions of bloody and deceitful
men: Hence persecutors are called bulls, bears, lions, wolves,
tigers, dragons, dogs, foxes, leopards, and the like.[3]

"And God said, Let us make man" (v 26).

I observe, that in the creation of the world, God goeth gradually
on, from things less, to things more abundantly glorious; I mean,
as to the creation of this earth; and the things that thereto
appertain. First he bringeth forth a confused chaos, then he
commands matter to appear distinct, then the earth bringeth forth
trees, and herbs, and grass; after that beasts; and the sea, fowls;
and last of all, Let us make man. Now passing by the doctrine
of the trinity, because spoken to before, I come to make some
observation upon this wonderful piece of the workmanship of God.

"Let us make man." Man in whom is also included the woman, was
made the last of the creatures. From whence we may gather,

God's respect to this excellent creature, in that he first provideth
for him, before he giveth him his being: He bringeth him not to an
empty house, but to one well furnished with all kind of necessaries,
having beautified the heaven and the earth with glory, and all
sorts of nourishment, for his pleasure and sustenance.[4]

"Let us make man in our image, after our likeness."

An image, or the likeness of any thing, is not the thing of which
it is a figure; so here, Adam is an image, or made in the likeness
of God. Now as Adam is the image of God, it must either respect
him, as he consisteth of the soul, as a part; or as he consists
of a body and soul together: If as he is made a reasonable soul,
then he is an excellent image of the eternal Godhead, the attributes
of the one being shadowed out by the qualities and passions of
the other; for as there is in the Godhead, power, knowledge, love,
and righteousness; so a likeness of these is in the soul of man,
especially of man before he had sinned: And as there is passions
of pity, compassion, affections, and bowels in man; so there are
these in a far more infinite way in God.

Again, If this image respect the whole man, then Adam was a figure
of God, as incarnate; or of God, as he was to be made afterwards
man. And hence it is, that as Adam is called the image of God
(Rom 5:14); so also is Christ himself called and reckoned as the
answering antitype of such an image.

But again, Though Adam be here called the image or similitude
of God; yet but so as that he was the shadow of a more excellent
image. Adam was a type of Christ, who only is "the express image"
of his Father's person, and the likeness of his excellent glory
(Heb 1:3). For those things that were in Adam, were but of a humane,
but of a created substance; but those that were in Christ, of the
same divine and eternal excellency with the Father.

Is Christ then the image of the Father, simply, as considered of
the same divine and eternal excellency with him? Certainly, No:
for an image is doubtless inferior to that of which it is a figure.
Understand then, that Christ is the image of the Father's glory,
as born of the Virgin Mary, yet so, as being very God also: Not
that his Godhead in itself was a shadow or image, but by the acts
and doing of that man, every act being infinitely perfect by virtue
of his Godhead, the Father's perfections were made manifest to
flesh. An image is to be looked upon, and by being looked upon,
another thing is seen; so by the person and doings of the Lord
Jesus, they that indeed could see him as he was, discovered the
perfection and glory of the Father.--"Philip, He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the
Father?" (John 14:9). Neither the Father nor the Son can by us at
all be seen, as they are simply and entirely in their own essence.
Therefore the person of the Father must be seen by us, through
the Son, as consisting of God and man; the Godhead, by working
effectually in the manhood, shewing clearly there through the
infinite perfection and glory of the Father: "The word was made
flesh, and--[then] we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, [He being in his personal excellencies,
infinitely and perfectly, what is recorded of his Father,] full
of grace and truth" (John 1:14). So again, he "is the image of
the invisible God" (Col 1:15). The Godhead is indeed invisible;
how then is Christ the image of it? Not by being invisible also;
for so is he as much hid as the Father; but being clothed with
flesh, that the works of the Son might by us be seen, he thereby
presenteth to us, as in a figure, the eternal excellency of the
Father. And hence as he is called "an image," he is also called
"the first-born" of every creature (Col 1:18). His being a creature,
respecting his manhood, and his birth, and his rising again from
the dead. Therefore a little after, he is called, "the first-born
from the dead" (v 19): And in another place, "the first-begotten
of the dead" (Rev 1:5): And "the first-fruits of them that slept"
(1 Cor 15:20). So then, though Adam was the image of God, yet
God's image but as a mere creature: But Christ though a creature
as touching his manhood; yet being also God, as the Father, he
shewed forth expressly, in capital characters, by all his works
and doings in the world, the beauty and glory of the Father: "The
light of the knowledge of the glory of God," is given "in the face
of Jesus Christ" (2 Cor 4:6). Where by face, we must understand
that which is visible, that being open when all else is covered,
and that by which most principally we are discovered to others,
and known. Now as to the case in hand, this face must signify to
us the personal virtues and doings of Christ, by which the glory
of the Father is exposed; the glory of his justice, by Christ's
exactness of life; the glory of his love, by Christ's compassion
to sinners, &c.

Ver. 26. "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the
earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth."

As Adam was a type of Christ, as the image and glory of God; so by
these words he further showeth, that he was a type of his sovereign
power; for to him be dominion and power everlasting (Heb 2:8,9),
"to whom be praise and dominion for ever" (1 Peter 4:11; Jude 25).
Now by the fish of the sea, the beasts of the earth, the fowls of
the air, and every creeping thing, we may understand all creatures,
visible and invisible, whether they be men, angels, or devils; in
heaven, earth, or under the earth: also all thrones, authorities
and powers, whether in heaven, in earth, or hell: Christ is made
head over all; He hath also a name above every name, "not only in
this world, but in that which is to come" (Eph 1:25).

Ver. 28. "And God blessed them; and God said unto them, [that is,
to the man and his wife] Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish
the earth, and subdue it," &c.

This in the type doth show, in the antitype, how fruitful Christ
and his church shall be; and how he at last shall, all over the
earth, have a seed to replenish and subdue it by the power of the
immortal seed of the word of God: how his name shall be reverenced
from one end of the earth to the other: how the kingdoms of the
earth shall ALL at last become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ.

"And subdue it." God did put that majesty and dread upon Adam, at
his creation, that all the beasts of the field submitted themselves
unto him. As God also said to Noah, "The fear of you and the dread
of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl
of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the
fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered" (Gen 9:2).

"And God said, Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the earth; and every tree, in the
which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be
for meat" (Gen 1:29).

These herbs and trees are types of the wholesome word of the gospel,
on which both Christ, his church, and unconverted sinners, ought
to feed and be refreshed; and without which thee is no subsisting
either of one or the other: "He causeth the grass to grow for the
cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth
food out of the earth; and wine that maketh glad the heart of man,
and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth
man's heart" (Psa 104:14,15).

"And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was
very good" (v 31).

All things have their natural goodness by creation. Things are not
good, because they have a being only, but because God gave them
such a being. Neither did God make them, because he saw they would
attract a goodness to themselves; but he made them in such kind,
as to bring forth that goodness he before determined they should.
"And the evening and the morning were the sixth day."

CHAPTER II.

Ver. 3. "And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because
that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and
made."

The seventh day did signify two things:

First, Christ Jesus, who is as well the rest of the justice of God,
as a rest for sinful man.

Secondly, It was also a type of that glorious rest that saints
shall have when the six days of this world are fully ended.

For the first, the apostle makes the sabbath a shadow of Jesus
Christ, "a shadow of things to come; but the body [or substance] is
of Christ" (Col 2:17). And hence it is that he is so often said to
be "a rest" to the Gentiles, a glorious rest, and that he promiseth
rest to such as cast their burthen upon him (Matt 11:29).

The second also the apostle asserteth in that fourth chapter to
the Hebrews, "There remaineth therefore a rest," or the keeping of
a sabbath, "to the people of God" (v 9 read also vv 4-11). Which
sabbath, as I conceive, will be the seventh thousand of years, which
are to follow immediately after the world hath stood six thousand
first: for as God was six days in the works of creation, and rested
the seventh; so in six thousand years he will perfect his works
and providences that concern this world. As also he will finish
the toil and travel of his saints, with the burthen of the beasts,
and the curse of the ground; and bring all into rest for a thousand
years. A day with the Lord, is as a thousand years: wherefore
this blessed and desirable time is also called "a day," "a great
day," "that great and notable day of the Lord" (Acts 2:20), which
shall end in the eternal judgment of the world. God hath held
forth this by several other shadows, as the sabbath of weeks, the
sabbath of years, and the great jubilee, which is to be the year
after forty-nine years are expired (Lev 25:1-13). Of all which,
more in their place, if God permit.

Ver. 4. "These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth
when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth
and the heavens."

Moses seems by these words, "In the day," to insist principally
upon them in their first and primitive state, before there was
sin or curse in the world; for in the day that they were created,
there was a far more glorious lustre and beauty than now can be
seen; the heaven, for sin, is, as it were, turned into brass; and
the rain into powder and dust, in comparison of what it was as it
came from the fingers of God. The earth hath also from that time
a curse upon it; yea, the whole creation, by sin, is even "made
subject to vanity," is in travail, and groans under the burthen
that sin hath brought upon it (Rom 8:19-23).

Ver. 5. "And every plant of the field before it was in the earth,
and every herb of the field before it grew."

Thus it was in the first creation; they therefore became neither
herbs nor trees, by the course of nature, but by the creation of
God. And even so it is in the new creation, men spring not up by
nature to be saints: No, not in the church of God, but first they
are created in Christ Jesus, and made meet to be partakers of the
benefit, and then planted in the church of God; "planted," I say,
as plants before prepared. Indeed hypocrites, and formal professors,
may spring up in the church, by virtue of her forms, and outward
services, as thorns and thistles spring up in the earth, by virtue
of her moisture and heartiness. But these are but the fruits of
the curse, and are determined to be burned at last in the fire:
"Every plant [saith Christ] which my heavenly Father hath not
planted, shall be rooted up" (Matt 15:13; Heb 6:8).[5]

"For the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth." This
is the reason that they came not up by nature first, but were
first created, then planted, then made to grow. So the reason why
men by nature grow not in the church, is, because the Lord doth not
cause it to rain upon them, they still abiding and doing according
to the course of this world; but he plants them in his house by
the mighty power of his word and Spirit, by which they are created
saints, and then they afterwards grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. "And there was not a man to
till the ground." It seems by this there was a kind of necessity
why God should make man, yea, a multitude of men; for otherwise he
had made what before he made in vain; that is, his end in making
so glorious a creature as this world, which was to shew forth his
glory by, had been void, and without effect; for although it was
glorious, as it came out of the hand of God; yet it was not of
power so to preserve itself, but would, without men to look after
and dress it, be turned into a wilderness.

Thus it is with the world of men, if there was not the second
Adam to plough them and sow them, they could none of them become
saints; No, not the elect themselves; because the means are
determined, as well as the end.

By this we may likewise see what a woeful condition that people is
in, that have no ministers of the word of the gospel: "My people
perish, [are destroyed] for lack of knowledge" (Hosea 4:6): And
again, "Where there is no vision, the people perish" (Pro 29:18).
Pray therefore to the Lord of the harvest, that he would send out
his ploughers to plough, and his labourers into his harvest.

Ver. 6. "But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the
whole face of the ground."

Although as yet there was no ploughman nor rain, yet a mist arose
from the earth; so where there is not the word of the gospel, there
is yet sufficiency of light, to teach men how to govern themselves
in civil and natural society. But this is only "a mist," men cannot
gospelly grow by this; therefore, as in the next verse, of necessity
man must be formed.

But again, I have sometimes thought by this mist, might be held
forth that nourishment men had by the doctrine of faith, before
the gospel was divulged by Moses, the prophets, or Christ, &c.
for before these, that nourishment the church received, was but
slender and short, even as short as the nourishing of the mist is
to sober and moderate showers of rain; to which both the law and
the gospel is compared.

Again, I have also sometimes thought, that by this mist might be
typified those excellent proverbs and holy sayings of the men of
old, before there was a written word; for it cannot be but the
godly did contain in proverbs, and certain sayings, the doctrine
of salvation hereafter, and of good living here [see Romans 2:14];
of which we have a touch in Genesis, but more at large by that
blessed book of Job; which book, in my opinion, is a holy collection
of those proverbs and sayings of the ancients, occasioned by the
temptation of that good man. But whatever this mist did signify (in
other men's judgment) certain it is, it was for present necessity,
till a man should be made to till the ground, and the fruits
thereof watered with "the bottles of heaven": Which, so far as I
see yet, most aptly presents us with some of all these.

Ver. 7. "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground,"
&c. In the creation of man, God began with his outside; but in the
work of regeneration, he first begins within, at the heart. He made
him; that is, his body, of the dust of the ground; but he abides
a lifeless lump, till the Lord puts forth a second act. "And [he]
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a
living soul." Now he lives, now he acts: so it is in the kingdom of
Christ, no man can be a living soul in that kingdom by his first
creation, he must have life "breathed" into him, life and spirit
from Jesus Christ (John 20:22).

Now therefore is Adam a type, yet but an earthly one, of things
more high and heavenly; "And as we have borne the image of the
earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly" (1 Cor 15:49).

Ver. 8. "And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden, and
there he put the man whom he had formed."

"And the Lord God planted a garden." Thus the Holy Ghost speaks
clearer and clearer; for now he presents the church to us under the
similitude of a garden, which is taken out of the wide and open
field, and inclosed; "A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse";
a garden inclosed, "a spring shut up, a fountain sealed" (Cant
4:12); and there he put the man whom he had formed. An excellent
type of the presence of Christ with his church (Rev 1:12,13).

Ver. 9. "And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every
tree that is pleasant to the sight," &c.

These trees, and their pleasurableness, do shew us the beauty of
the truly godly, whom the Lord hath beautified with salvation. And
hence it is said, the glory of Lebanon, of Sharon, and of Carmel,
is given to the church: that is, she is more beautified with gifts
and graces than can by types and shadows be expressed. "The tree
of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge
of good and evil."

This "tree of life," was another type of Christ, as the bread and
healing medicine of the church, that stands "in the midst of the
paradise of God" (Rev 2:7; 22:2).

The tree of the knowledge of good and evil, was a type of the law,
or covenant of works, as the sequel of the story clearly manifesteth;
for had not Adam eaten thereof, he had enjoyed for ever his first
blessedness. As Moses saith, "It shall be our righteousness, if
we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God,
as he hath commanded us" (Deu 6:25). But both Adam and we have
touched, that is, broken the boughs and fruit of this tree, and
therefore now for ever, by the law, no man can stand just before
God (Gal 2:16).

Ver. 10. "And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and
from thence it was parted, and became into four heads."

This river while it abided in Eden, in the garden, it was the
river of God; that is, serviceable to the trees and fruit of the
garden, and was herein a type of those watering ministers that
water the plants of the Lord. But observe, when it had passed the
garden, had gotten without the bound of the garden, from thence
it was parted, and became into four heads; from thence it was
transformed, or turned into another manner of thing: it now became
into four heads; a type of the four great monarchies of the world,
of which Babylon, though the first in order of being, yet the last
in a gospel or mysterious sense. The fourth is the river Euphrates,
that which was the face of the kingdom of Babel of old. Hence
note, That how eminent and serviceable soever men are while they
abide in the garden of Eden, THE CHURCH; yet when they come out
from thence, they evilly seek the great things of the world: one
is for compassing the whole land of Havilah, where is gold; another
is for compassing this, a third that, and a fourth another thing,
according as you see these four heads did. Observe again, That
while men abide in the church of God, there is not by them a
seeking after the monarchies of this world; but when they depart
from thence, then they seek and strive to be heads; as that cursed
monster the pope, forsaking the garden of God, became in a manner
the prince of all the earth: Of whom Tyrus mentioned by Ezekiel,
was a very lively type, "Thou hast been in Eden, the garden of
God; every precious-stone, [that is, doctrine,] was thy covering;
as the sardius, topaz, diamond," &c., "till iniquity was found
in thee" (Eze 28:13-18); till thou leftest thy station, and place
appointed of God, and then thou wast cast as profane out of the
mountain of God, yea, though a covering cherub. See it again in
Cain, who while he continued in the church, he was a busy sacrificer,
as busy as Abel his brother; but when he left off to fear the
Lord, and had bloodily butchered his holy brother, then he seeks
to be a head, or monarch; then he goeth and buildeth a city to
preserve his name and posterity for ever (Gen 4:17).

Ver. 15. "And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the
garden of Eden, to dress it and to keep it."

In this also Adam was a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ, as pastor
and chief bishop of his church. "I the Lord, [saith Christ,] do
keep it; I will water it every moment, I will keep it night and
day" (Isa 27:3).

"And the Lord God took the man." No man taketh this honour upon
him, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Blessed is he also
that can say as the prophet Amos; "And the Lord took me [said he]
as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy
unto my people Israel" (Amos 7:15).

"To dress it and to keep it." He that is not dressed, is not kept:
That is a sad judgment, That which dieth, let it die; That which
is diseased, let it not be dressed, let it die of that disease. By
dressing therefore I understand, pruning, manuring and the like,
which the dresser of the vineyard was commanded to do, without
which all is overrun with briers and nettles, and is fit for
nothing but cursing, and to be burned (Luke 13:6-9; Pro 24:30-34;
Heb 6:7,8).

"And the Lord commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the
garden thou mayest freely eat" (v 16).

It is God's word that giveth us power to eat, to drink, and do other
our works, and without the word we may do nothing. The command
gave Adam leave: "Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified
by the word of God [by the command of the word, and by receiving
of it according to the limits thereof,] and prayer" (1 Tim 4:4,5).

Ver. 17. "But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou
shalt not eat of it." I said before, What God's word prohibits, we
must take care to shun.

This "tree of knowledge," as I said before, was a type of the covenant
of works, the which had not Adam touched, (for by touching it he
broke that covenant,) he then had lived ever, but touching it he
dies (Gen 3:3).

Adam going into the garden under these conditions and penalties,
was therein a type of the humiliation of Christ; who at his coming
into the world, was made under the law, under its command and
penalty, even as other men, but without sin (Gal 4:4,5).

"For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die."

"For in the day." Adam lived to God no longer than while he kept
himself from eating forbidden fruit; in that very day he died;
first a spiritual death in his soul; his body also was then made
capable of mortality, and all diseases, which two great impediments
in time brought him down to dust again.

Ver. 18. "And the Lord God said, It is not good that man should be
alone; I will make him an help meet for him."

By these words, Adam's state, even in innocency, seems to crave
for help; wherefore it is manifest that that state is short of that
we attain by the resurrection from the dead; yea, for as much as
his need required earthly help, it is apparent his condition was
not heavenly; "The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second
man is the Lord from heaven" (1 Cor 15:47). Adam in his first
estate was not spiritual: "That was not first which is spiritual,
but that which is natural; and afterwards that which is spiritual"
(v 46). Wherefore those that think it enough to attain to the state
of Adam in innocency, think it sufficient to be mere naturalists;
think themselves well, without being made spiritual: yea, let
me add, they think it safe standing by a covenant of works; they
think themselves happy, though not concerned in a covenant of
grace; they think they know enough, though ignorant of a mediator,
and count they have no need of the intercession of Christ.[6]

Adam stood by a covenant of works: Adam's kingdom was an earthly
paradise; Adam's excellency was, that he had not need of a Saviour;
and Adam's knowledge was ignorance of Jesus Christ: Adam in his
greatest glory, wanted earthly comforts; Adam in his innocency,
was a mere natural man.

Ver. 19. "And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast
of the field, and every fowl of the air."

This proveth further what I said at first, That in the first chaos
was contained all that was made upon the earth.

"And brought them unto Adam, to see what he would call them: and
whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name
thereof."

In this Adam was a lively type of the Lord Christ's sovereign and
glorious power over all flesh: "Thou hast given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast
given him" (John 17:2).

"And brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them."

So Christ nameth the world; whom he will he calleth saints; and
whom he will he calleth the world, "ungodly," "serpents," "vipers,"
and the like. "I pray for them, I pray not for the world" (John
17:9).

"And whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name
thereof." Even as Christ passes sentence, so shall their judgment
be.

Ver. 20. "And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of
the air, and to every beast of the field." So Christ judgeth of
angels, devils, and men.

"But for Adam, there was not found an help meet for him." All
the glory of this world, had not Adam had a wife, could not have
completed this man's blessedness; he would yet have been wanting:
so all the glory of heaven, considering Christ as mediator, could
not, without his church, have made him up complete. The church,
I say, "which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in
all."

Ver. 21, 22. "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon
Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the
flesh instead thereof; and the rib which the Lord God had taken
from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man."

In these words we find an help provided for Adam; also whence it
came. The help was a wife; she came out of his side; she was taken
thence while Adam slept. A blessed figure of a further mystery.
Adam's wife was a type of the church of Christ; for that she was
taken out of his side, it signifies we are flesh of Christ's flesh,
and bone of Christ's bone (Eph 5:30). And in that she was taken
thence while Adam slept, it signifies, the church is Christ's, by
virtue of his death and blood: "Feed the church of God, which he
hath purchased with is own blood" (Acts 20:28).

"And he brought her to the man." That is, And God brought her to
the man. By which he clearly intimates, That as the church is the
workmanship of God, and the purchase of the blood of Christ; so
yet she cannot come to Christ, unless brought to him of God: "No
man can come to me [saith Christ] except the Father which hath
sent me, draw him" (John 6:44).

Ver. 23. "And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh
of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out
of Man."

In that Adam doth thus acknowledge his wife to be bone and flesh
of his substance, it shews us, that Christ will acknowledge those
that are his: "He is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I
will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church
will I sing praise unto thee" (Heb 2:11,12).

And observe it, He said, "She is bone of my bone," &c. before that
God, that brought her to him; intimating, that Christ both owns
us now at his Father's right hand, and will not be ashamed of us,
even in the day of judgment (Matt 10:33; Luke 12:8).

Ver. 24. "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother,
and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh."

This ought to be truly performed in our married estate in this
world. But here endeth not the mystery.

"Therefore shall a man leave his father." Thus did Christ when he
came into the world to save sinners: He came forth from the Father;
"I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world" (John
16:28).

"Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother." The Jewish
church may, in a mystical sense, be called the mother of Christ;
for she was indeed God's wife, and of her came his Son Jesus Christ:
yet his mother he left and forsook, to be joined to his Gentile
spouse, which is now his only wife.

Ver. 25. "And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were
not ashamed."

No sin, no shame: Let men stand where God hath set them, and there
is no cause of shame, though they be exposed in outward appearance
to never so much contempt.

"And they were both naked." Apparel is the fruits of sin; wherefore
let such as pride themselves therein, remember, that they cover one
shame with another. But let them that are truly godly have their
apparel modest and sober, and with shamefacedness put them on,
remembering always the first cause of our covering our nakedness,
was the sin and shame of our first parents (1 Peter 3:3).

CHAPTER III.

Ver. 1. "Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the
field which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman,
Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?"

In these words we have an entrance of the first great spiritual
conflict that was fought between the devil and flesh; and it is
worth the observing, how the enemy attempted, engaged, and overcame
the world (2 Cor 11:3).

1. He tempts by means; he appeareth not in his own shape and hue,
but assumeth the body of one of the creatures, the body of the
serpent, and so begins the combat. And from hence it is, that in
after ages he is spoken of under the name of that creature, "the
dragon, that old serpent which is the devil, and Satan" (Rev 20:2);
because, as the Holy Ghost would have us beware of the devil, so
of the means and engines which he useth; for where one is overcome
by his own fearful appearance, ten thousand are overcome by the
means and engines that he useth.

2. "The serpent was more subtil." The devil, in his attempts after
our destruction, maketh use of the most suitable means. The serpent
was more subtil, therefore the cunning of the devil was least of
all discerned. Had he made use of some of the most foolish of the
creatures, Adam had luckily started back, for he knew the nature
of all the creatures, and gave them names accordingly; wherefore
the serpent, Adam knew, was subtil, therefore Satan useth him,
thereby to catch this goodly creature. Hereby the devil least
appeared; and least appearing, the temptation soonest took the
tinder.[7]

"Now the serpent was more subtil." More subtil. Hence the devil
is called, "the serpent with heads," [with great cunning;] "the
crooked serpent," [with knotty objections;] "the piercing serpent,"
[for he often wounds;] and his ways are called "devices," "temptations,"
"delusions," "wiles," "power," and "the gates of hell"; because
of their mighty prevalency. This is he that undertook our first
parents.

But how did he undertake them?

He labours to make them question the simplicity of the word of
God, bearing Adam's wife in hand, that there must needs be some
meaning that palliates the text; Hath God said ye shall not eat of
the tree? Which interrogatory suggested them with a strong doubt
that this word would not appear a truth, if you compare it with
the 4th verse.

Hence learn, that so long as we retain the simplicity of the word,
we have Satan at the end of the staff; for unless we give way to
a doubt about that, about the truth and simplicity of it, he gets
no ground upon us. And hence the apostle says, He feared lest by
some means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so
our minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ
(2 Cor 11:3); that is, lest our minds should be drawn off from the
simplicity of the word of the gospel by some devilish and delusive
arguments; For mark, Satan doth not first of all deny, but makes a
doubt upon the word, whether it is to be taken in this or another
sense; and so first corrupting the mind with a doubt about the
simplicity of the true sense, he after brings them to a denial
thereof; "Hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the
garden?"

Ver. 2. "And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the
fruit of the trees of the garden."

"And the woman said." Indeed, the question was put to her, but the
command was not so immediately delivered to her: "The Lord God
commanded the man" (2:16). This therefore I reckon a great fault
in the woman, an usurpation, to undertake so mighty an adversary,
when she was not the principal that was concerned therein; nay,
when her husband who was more able than she, was at hand, to whom
also the law was given as chief. But for this act, I think it is,
that they are now commanded silence, and also commanded to learn
of their husbands (1 Cor 14:34,35): A command that is necessary
enough for that simple and weak sex:[8] Though they see it was
by them that sin came into the world, yet how hardly are some of
them to this day dissuaded from attempting unwarrantably to meddle
with potent enemies, about the great and weighty matters that
concern eternity (1 Tim 2:11-15).

Hence note, That often they who are least able, will first adventure
to put in their head to defend that, from whence they return with
shame.

"And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of
the trees of the garden."

This was her prologue to her defence, but that also for which she
had no warrant. In time of temptation, it is our wisdom and duty
to keep close to the word, that prohibits and forbids the sin;
and not to reason with Satan, of how far our outward and worldly
privileges go, especially of those privileges that border upon the
temptation, as she here did: We may eat of all but one. By this
she goeth to the outside of her liberty, and sets herself upon the
brink of the danger. Christ might have told the tempter, when he
assaulted him, That he could have made stones bread; and that he
could have descended from the pinnacle of the temple, as afterwards
he did (Matt 4:3-7; Luke 4); but that would have admitted of other
questions. Wherefore he chooseth to lay aside such needless and
unwarrantable reasonings, and resisteth him with a direct word of
God, most pertinent to quash the tempter, and also to preserve
himself in the way. To go to the outside of privileges, especially
when tempted of the devil, is often, if not always very dangerous
and hazardous.

By these words therefore, in mine opinion, she spoke at this time
too much in favour of the flesh; and made way for what after came
upon her, We may eat of all but one.

Ver. 3. "But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of
the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall
ye touch it, lest ye die."

Now, too late, she urgeth that which should have been her only stay
and weapon; to wit, the express word of God; That she should, if
she would have disputed with the tempter, have urged at the first
that only, and have thought of nothing else. Thus did the Lord
himself: but she looking first into those worthy privileges which
God had given her, and dilating delightfully of them before the
devil, she lost the dread of the command from off her heart, and
retained now but the notion of it: which Satan perceiving, and
taking heart therefrom to make his best advantage, he now adds to
his former forged doubt, a plain and flat denial, "Ye shall not
surely die."

Ver. 4. "And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely
die."

When people dally with the devil, and sit too near their outward
advantages; when they are tempted to break the command of God, it
is usual for them, even by setting their hearts upon things that
in themselves are honest and lawful, to fall into temptation: To
see a piece of ground, to prove a yoke of oxen, to marry a wife, are
doubtless lawful things; but upon the borders of these privileges
lay the temptation of the devil; therefore by the love of these,
which yet were lawful in themselves, the devil hardened the heart,
and so at last made way for, and perfectly produced in them, flatly
to deny, as then, to embrace the words of God's salvation (Matt
22:5; Luke 14:16-20). The like befel our first mother; wherefore
though at last she freely objected the word; yet because before
she had so much reasoned to the pleasing of the flesh, she lost
the dread and savour of the command, and having nought but notion
left, she found not wherewith to rebuke so plain a lie of the devil,
but hearkened to his further reasoning.

"Ye shall not surely die." Not surely; in the word there is some
slight meaning, of which you need not be so afraid. And besides,

Ver. 5. "God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your
eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and
evil."

In these words two privileges are asserted: one, That their eyes
should be opened; the other, That they should be as gods, knowing
good and evil. The first is very desirable, and was not at all
abridged by them; the second, as to their knowing good and evil,
was absolutely forbidden; because they could not attain to the
knowledge of that which was evil, but by transgressing, or by
eating of that forbidden tree.

Hence observe, That it is usual with the devil, in his tempting
of poor creatures, to put a good and bad together, that by shew
of the good, the tempted might be drawn to do that which in truth
is evil. Thus he served Saul; he spared the best of the herd and
flock, under pretence of sacrificing to God, and so transgressed
the plain command (1 Sam 15:20-22). But this the apostle saw was
dangerous, and therefore censureth such, as in a state of condemnation
(Rom 3:8). Thus he served Adam; he put the desirableness of
sight, and a plain transgression of God's law together, that by
the loveliness of the one, they might the easier be brought to
do the other. O poor Eve! Do we wonder at thy folly! Doubtless we
had done as bad with half the argument of thy temptation.

"Ye shall be as gods." In these words he attempts to beget in them
a desire to be greater than God had made them (1 Tim 3:6). He knew
this was a likely way, for by this means he fell himself; for being
puffed up with pride, they left their own estate, or habitation,
and so became devils, and were tumbled down to hell, where they are
"reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment
of the great day" (Jude 6).

"Ye shall be as gods." When souls have begun to hearken to the
tempter, that hearkening hath made way for, and given way to so
much darkness of mind, and hardness of heart, that now they can
listen to anything: as to hear God charged with folly, "Ye shall
not surely die"; as to hear him made the author of ignorance, and
that he delights to have it so, by seeking by a command to prohibit
them from knowing what they could; for God doth know, that in the
day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened; and therefore
he forbids to touch it.

"Ye shall be as gods." Here is also a pretence of holiness, which
he knew they were prone unto; "Ye shall be as gods," as knowing
and perfect as God. Oh! Thousands are, even to this day, by such
temptations overcome! Thus he wraps his temptations up in such
kind of words and suggestions as will carry it either way. But mark
his holiness, or the way that he prescribes for holiness; it is,
if not point blank against, yet without and besides the word, not
by doing what God commands, and abhorring what he forbids, but by
following the delusion of the devil, and their own roving fancies;
as Eve here does.

Ver. 6. "And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food,
and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to
make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof," &c.

This verse presents us with the use that Eve made of the reasonings
of the serpent; and that was, to take them into consideration; not
by the word of God, but as her flesh and blood did sense them:
A way very dangerous and devouring to the soul, from which Paul
fled, as from the devil himself: "Immediately I conferred not with
flesh and blood" (Gal 1:16). Wherefore, pausing upon them, they
entangled her as with a threefold cord. 1. "The lust of the flesh";
she saw it was good for food. 2. "The lust of the eye"; she saw
it was pleasant to the eye. 3. "The pride of life"; a tree to be
desired, to make one wise (1 John 2:16). Being taken, I say, with
these three snares of the adversary, which are not of the Father,
but of the world, and the devil the prince thereof, forthwith she
falls before him: "And when the woman saw" this, "she took of the
fruit thereof, and did eat."

"And when the woman saw." This seeing, as I said, is to be
understood of her considering what Satan presented to her, and of
her sensing or tasting of his doctrine; not by the word, which
ought to be the touch stone of all, but by and according to her
own natural reason without it. Now this makes her forget that
very command that but now she had urged against the tempter: This
makes her also to consent to that very reason, as an inducement
to transgress; which, because it was the nature of the tree, was
by God suggested as a reason why they should forbear; it was the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, therefore they should not
touch it; it was the tree, that would by touching it, make them
know good and evil; therefore she toucheth, and also eateth thereof.
See therefore what specious pretences the devil, and those that
are under the power of temptation, will have to transgress the
command of God. That which God makes a reason of the prohibition,
even that the devil will make a reason of their transgression.

God commands to self-denial, but the world makes that a reason of
their standing off from the very grace of God in the gospel. God
also commands, That we be sober, chaste, humble, just, and the
like; but the devil, and carnal hearts, make these very things the
argument that keeps sinners from the word of salvation. Or rather
take it thus; God forbids wickedness, because it is delightful to
the flesh, and draws the heart from God, but therefore carnal men
love wickedness and sin: Therefore they go on in sin, and "therefore
they say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways" (Job 21:14; 22:15-17).

She "did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did
eat."

The great design of the devil, as he supposed, was now accomplished;
for he had both in the snare, both the man and his wife, and in
them, the whole world that should be after. And indeed the chief
design of Satan was at the head at first, only he made the weakest
the conveyance for his mischief. Hence note again, That Satan by
tempting one, may chiefly intend the destruction of another. By
tempting the wife, he may aim at the destruction of the husband;
by tempting the father, he may design the destruction of the
children; and by tempting the king, he may design the ruin of the
subjects. Even as in the case of David: "Satan stood up against
Israel, and provoked David to number the people." He had a mind
to destroy seventy thousand, therefore he tempted David to sin (1
Chron 21:1).

She gave also to her husband, and he did eat. Sin seldom or never
terminates in one person; but the pernicious example of one, doth
animate and embolden another; or thus, the beholding of evil in
another, doth often allure a stander-by. Adam was the looker-on, he
was not in the action as from the serpent: "Adam was not deceived,"
that is, by having to do with the devil, "but the woman, the woman
being deceived, was in the transgression" (1 Tim 2:14). This should
exhort all men that they take heed of so much as beholding evil
done by others, lest also they should be allured. When Israel
went into Canaan, God did command them not so much as to ask, How
those nations served their gods? lest by so doing, Satan should
get an advantage of their minds, to incline them to do the like
(Deu 12:30). Evil acts, as well as evil words, will eat as doth
a canker. This then is the reason of that evil-favouredness that
you see attending some men's lives and professions; they have been
corrupted, as Adam was, either by evil words or bad examples, even
till the very face of their lives and professions are disfigured
as with the pox or canker (2 Tim 2:17).

Thus have we led you through that woeful tragedy that was acted
between the woman and the serpent; and have also shewed, how it
happened that the serpent went away as victor.

1. The woman admitted of a doubt about the truth of the word that
forbad her to eat; for unbelief was the first sin that entered the
world.

2. She preferred the privileges of the flesh, before the argument
to self-denial; by which means her heart became hardened, and grew
senseless of the dread and terror of the words of God.

3. She took Satan's arguments into consideration, and sensed,[9]
or tasted them; not by the word of God, but her own natural, or
rather sore-deluded fancy.

4. She had a mind to gratify the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of
the eyes, and the pride of life.

Now to speak of the evil consequences that followed this sinful
act: That is not in the wisdom of mortal man to do; partly, because
we know but in part even the evil and destructive nature of sin;
and partly, because much of the evil that will follow this action,
is yet to be committed by persons unborn. Yet enough might be said
to astonish the heavens, and to make them horribly afraid (Jer
2:12). 1. By this act of these two, the whole world became guilty
of condemnation and eternal judgment (Rom 5). 2. By this came all
the blindness, atheism, ignorance of God, enmity and malice against
him, pride, covetousness, adultery, idolatry, and implacableness,
&c., that is found in all the world. By this, I say, came all the
wars, blood, treachery, tyranny, persecution, with all manner of
rapine and outrage that is found among the sons of men. 3. Besides,
all the plagues, judgments, and evils that befal us in this world,
with those everlasting burnings that will swallow up millions for
ever and ever; all and every whit of these came into the world as
the portion of mankind, for that first transgression of our first
parents.

Ver. 7. "And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that
they were naked; and they sewed fig-leaves together, and made
themselves aprons."

That their eyes might be opened, was one branch of the temptation,
and one of the reasons that prevailed with the woman to forsake the
word of God: But she little thought of seeing after this manner,
or such things as now she was made to behold. She expected some
sweet and pleasant sight, that might tickle and delight her deluded
fancy; but behold, sin and the wrath of God appears, to the shaking
of their hearts! And thus, even to this very day, doth the devil
delude the world: His temptations are gilded with some sweet and
fine pretences; either they shall be wiser, richer, more in favour,
live merrier, fare better, or something; and that they shall see
it, if they will but obey the devil: Which the fools easily are,
by these and such like things, allured to do. But behold, when
their eyes are opened, instead of seeing what the devil falsely
told them, they see themselves involved in sin, made guilty of
the breach of God's command, and subject to the wrath of God.[10]

"And they knew that they were naked." Not only naked of outward
clothing, but even destitute of righteousness; they had lost their
innocency, their uprightness, and sinless vail, and had made
themselves polluted creatures, both in their hearts and in their
flesh; this is nakedness indeed; such a kind of nakedness as Aaron
made Israel naked with, when he set up his idol calf for them to
worship: "For Aaron had made them naked unto their shame" (Exo
32:25). Naked before the justice of the law.

"And they knew that they were naked." And they knew it: Why, did
they not know it before? The text says, They were naked, and were
not ashamed. O! they stood not naked before God! they stood not
without righteousness, or uprightness before him, and therefore
were not ashamed, but now they knew they were naked as to that.

"And they sewed fig-leaves together, and made themselves aprons."
A fit resemblance of what is the inclination of awakened men,
who are yet but natural! They neither think of Christ, or of the
mercy of God in him for pardon, but presently they betake themselves
to their own fig-leaves, to their own inventions, or to the
righteousness of the law, and look for healing from means which
God did never provide for cure. "When Ephraim saw his sickness, and
Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian" (Hosea
5:13). Not to God, and sent to King Jarib, not to Christ, yet
could they not heal him, nor cure him of his wound.

"And made themselves aprons." Not coats, as God did afterwards. A
carnal man thinks himself sufficiently clothed with righteousness,
if the nakedness which he sees, can be but covered from his own
sight: As if God also did see that and only that which they have
a sight of by the light of nature; and as if because fig-leaves
would hide their nakedness from their sight, that therefore they
would hide it from the sight of God. But alas! No man, without
the help of another, can bring all his nakedness to the sight of
his own eye; much is undiscovered to him, that may yet lie open
and bare to a stander-by: So it is with the men that stand without
Christ before God, at best they see but some of their nakedness,
to wit, their most gross and worst faults, and therefore they seek
to cover them; which when they have hid from their own sight, they
think them hid also from the sight of God. Thus did Adam, he saw
his own most shameful parts, and therefore them he covered: They
made themselves aprons, or things to gird about them, not to cover
them all over withal. No man by all his own doings can hide all
his own nakedness from the sight of the justice of God, and yet,
but in vain, as busy as Adam to do it.

"And they sewed fig-leaves together, and made themselves aprons."
Fig-leaves! A poor apron, but it was the best they could get.
But was that a sufficient shelter against either thorn or thistle?
Or was it possible but that after a while these fig-leaves should
have become rotten, and turned to dung? So will it be with all
man's own righteousness which is of the law; Paul saw it so, and
therefore counted it but loss and dung, that he might win Christ,
and be found in him (Phil 3:7,8).

Ver. 8. "And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the
garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves
from the presence of the Lord God, among the trees of the garden."

"And they heard the voice of the Lord God." This voice was not to
be understood according, as if it was the effect of a word; as
when we speak, the sound remains with a noise for some time after;
but by voice here, we are to understand the Lord Christ himself;
wherefore this voice is said to walk, not to sound only: "They
heard the voice of the Lord God walking." This voice John calls the
word, the word that was with the Father before he made the world,
and that at this very time was heard to walk in the garden of Adam:
Therefore John also saith, this voice was in the beginning; that
is, in the garden with Adam, at the beginning of his conversion,
as well as of the beginning of the world (John 1:1).

"And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in
the cool of the day." The gospel of it is, in the season of grace;
for by the cool of the day, he here means, in the patience,
gentleness, goodness and mercy of the gospel; and it is opposed to
the heat, fire, and severity of the law.

"And Adam and his wife hid themselves." Hence observe, That a
man's own righteousness will not fortify his conscience from fear
and terror, when God begins to come near to him to judgment. Why
did Adam hide himself, but because, as he said, he was naked? But
how could he be naked, when before he had made himself an apron?
O! the approach of God consumed and burnt off his apron! Though
his apron would keep him from the sight of a bird, yet it would
not from the eye of the incorruptible God.

Let therefore all self-righteous men beware, for however they at
present please themselves with the worthiness of their glorious
fig-leaves; yet when God shall come to deal with them for sin,
assuredly they will find themselves naked.[11]

"And they hid themselves." A man in a natural state, cannot abide
the presence of God; yea, though a righteous man. Adam, though
adorned with his fig-leaves, flies.

Observe again, That a self-righteous man, a man of the law, takes
grace and mercy for his greatest enemy. This is apparent from the
carriage of the Pharisees to Jesus Christ, who because they were
wedded to the works of their own righteousness, therefore they hated,
persecuted, condemned, and crucified the Saviour of the world. As
here in the text, though the voice of the Lord God walked in the
garden in the cool of the day, in the time of grace and love, yet
how Adam with his fig-leaves flies before him.

"And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the
Lord God." These latter words are spoken, not to persuade us that
men can hide themselves from God, but that Adam, and those that
are his by nature, will seek to do it, because they do not know him
aright. These words therefore further shew us what a bitter thing
sin is to the soul; it is only for hiding work, sometimes under
its fig-leaves, sometimes among the trees of the garden. O what
a shaking, starting, timorous evil conscience, is a sinful and
guilty conscience! especially when 'tis but a little awakened, it
could run its head into every hole, first by one fancy, then by
another; for the power and goodness of a man's own righteousness,
cannot withstand or answer the demands of the justice of God, and
his holy law.

"And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the
Lord God, among the trees of the garden." If you take the trees
in a mystical sense as sometimes they may be taken (Eze 31:8-11);
then take them here to signify, or to be a type of the saints
of God, and then the gospel of it is, That carnal men, when they
are indeed awakened, and roused out of their foolish fig-leaf
righteousness; then they would be glad of some shelter with them
that are saved and justified freely by grace, as they in the
Gospel of Matthew; "Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone
out" (Matt 25:8). And again, The man without the wedding garment
had crowded himself among the wedding guests: Had hid themselves
among the trees of the garden (Matt 22:11).

Ver. 9. "And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him,
Where art thou?"

Adam having eaten of the forbidden tree, doth now fleet his
station, is gone to another than where God left him. Wherefore, if
God will find Adam, he must now look him where he had hid himself.
And indeed so he does with "Adam, where art thou?"

"And the Lord God called," &c. Here begins the conversion of Adam,
from his sinful state, to God again. But mark, it begins not at
Adam's calling upon God, but at God calling upon him: "And the
Lord God called unto Adam." Wherefore, by these words, we are to
understand the beginning of Adam's conversion. And indeed, grace
hath gone the same way with the elect, from that time to this day.
Thus he dealt with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; he called them from
their native country, the country of their kindred. And hence it
is, that, especially in the New Testament, the saints are said
to be the Called; "Called of God," and "Called of Jesus Christ."
And hence again it is that Calling is by Paul made the first
demonstration of election, and that saints are admonished to prove
their election by their calling; for as Adam was in a lost, miserable
and perishing condition, until God called him out of those holes
into which sin had driven him: so we do lie where sin and the
devil hath laid us, until by the word of God we are called to the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ.

By these words therefore we have the beginning of the discovery
of effectual calling or conversion; "And the Lord God called": In
which call observe three things,

1. God called so that Adam heard him. And so it is in the conversion
of the New Testament saints, as Paul says, "If ye have heard him,
and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus" (Eph 4:21).
That therefore is one discovery of effectual calling, the sinner
is made to HEAR him, even to hear him distinctly, singling out the
very person, calling, "Adam, Where art thou?" "Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?" I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine. As he also said to Moses, "I know thee by name, and thou
hast also found grace in my sight" (Exo 33:12).

2. God called so, as to fasten sin upon his conscience, and as to
force a confession from him of his naked and shameful state.

3. God called so, as to make him tremble under, and be afraid of
the judgment of God.

"And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art
thou?" Indeed, Where art thou must of necessity be forcibly urged
to every man on whose soul God doth work effectual conversion;
for until the person is awakened, as to the state and condition
he is in, he will not desire, nay, will not endure to be turned
to God; but when in truth they are made to see what condition sin
hath brought them to, namely, that it hath laid them under the
power of sin, the tyranny of the devil, the strength of death,
and the curse of God by his holy law; then is mercy sweet.

"Where art thou?" God knew where he was, but foolish Adam thought
otherwise; he thought to hide himself from the presence of the
Lord, but the Lord found him out. Indeed, deluded sinners think
that they can hide themselves and sins from God. "How doth God
know," say they, "Can he judge through the thick cloud?" (Job 22:13).
But such shall know he sees them; they shall know it, either to
their correction, or to their condemnation. "Though they dig into
hell," saith God, "thence shall mine hand take them; though they
climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down: And though they
hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them
out thence," &c. (Amos 9:2,3).[12] "Can any hide himself in secret
places that I shall not see him, saith the Lord? Do not I fill
heaven and earth? saith the Lord" (Jer 23:24).

Ver. 10. "And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was
afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself."

This then was the cause of his flying, he heard the voice of God:
A wicked and evil conscience saith, every thing is to it as the
messenger of death and destruction; for, as was said before, "the
voice of the Lord walked in the garden in the cool of the day," in
the time of grace and mercy. But it mattereth not whether he came
with grace or vengeance; guilt was in Adam's heart, therefore he
could not endure the presence of God: He "that doeth evil hateth
the light" (John 3:20). And again, "The wicked flee when no man
pursueth" (Pro 28:1). Cain thought all that met him, would seek
his blood and life.

"I heard thy voice." Something by the word of God was spoken,
that shook the heart of this poor creature; something of justice
and holiness, even before they fell into this communication: for
observe it, Adam went forthwith from the tree of knowledge of good
and evil a convinced man, first to his fig-leaves, but they would
not do; therefore he seeks to be hid among the trees. And observe
again, That the insufficiency of fig-leaves were discovered by
this voice of the Lord God, that at this time walked in the garden:
"I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was
naked; and I hid myself." So then, there was a first and second
voice which Adam heard; the first he ran away from, "I heard thy
voice, and hid myself." The second was this, wherein they commune
each with other. The first therefore was the word of justice,
severity, and of the vengeance of God; like that in the 19th of
Exodus, from the pronouncing of which, a trembling, and almost
death, did seize six hundred thousand persons.

"I heard thy voice in the garden." It is a word from without that
doth it. While Adam listened to his own heart, he thought fig-leaves
a sufficient remedy, but the voice that walked in the garden shook
him out of all such fancies: "I heard thy voice in the garden, and
I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself."

Ver. 11. "And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou
eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest
not eat?"

"Who told thee?" This, as I said before, supposeth a third person,
a preacher, and that was the Son of God; the voice of the Lord
God that walked in the garden.

"Hast thou eaten of the tree?" That is, If thou hast been shewed
thy nakedness, thou hast indeed sinned; for the voice of the Lord
God will not charge guilt, but where and when a law hath been
transgressed. God therefore, by these words, driveth Adam to the
point, either to confess or deny the truth of the case. If he
confess, then he concludes himself under judgment; if he deny, then
he addeth to his sin: Therefore he neither denieth nor confesseth,
but so as he may lessen and extenuate his sin.

Ver. 12. "And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with
me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat."

He had endeavoured with fig-leaves to hide his transgressions
before, but that being found too scanty and short, he now trieth
what he can do with arguments. Indeed he acknowledgeth that he
did eat of the tree of which he was forbidden; but mark where he
layeth the reason: Not in any infection which was centred in him
by reason of his listening to the discourse which was between the
woman and the serpent; but because God had given him a woman to
be with him: "The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave
me of the tree." The woman was given for an help, not an hindrance;
but Satan often maketh that to become our snare, which God hath
given us as a blessing. Adam therefore here mixeth truth with
falsehood. It is true, he was beguiled by the woman; but she was
not intended of God, as he would insinuate, to the end she might
be a trap unto him. Here therefore Adam sought to lessen and
palliate his offence, as man by nature is prone to do; for if God
will needs charge them with the guilt of sin for the breach of
the law, they will lay the fault upon anything, even upon God's
ordinance, as Adam here doth, rather than they will honestly fall
under the guilt, and so the judgment of the law for guilt. It is a
rare thing, and it argueth great knowledge of God, and also hope
in his mercy, when men shall heartily acknowledge their iniquities,
as is evident in the case of David: "Wash me thoroughly from
mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge my
transgressions: and my sin is ever before me" (Psa 51:2,3). But
his knowledge is not at first in young converts; therefore when
God begins to awaken, they begin, as sleepy men, to creep further
under their carnal covering; which yet is too short to hide them,
and too narrow to cover their shame (Isa 28:20).

"The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the
tree." Although, as I said, this sinner seeks to hide, or at least
to lessen his sin, by laying the cause upon the woman, the gift
of God; yet it argueth that his heart was now filled with shame
and confusion of face, for that he had broken God's command; for
indeed it is the nature of guilt, however men may in appearance
ruffle under it, and set the best leg before, for their vindication;
yet inwardly to make them blush and fail before their accuser.
Indeed their inward shame is the cause of their excuse; even as
Aaron, when he had made the golden calf, could not for shame of
heart confess in plainness of speech the truth of the fact to his
brother Moses, but faulteringly: They gave me their gold, saith
he, and "I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf"
(Exo 32:24). "And there came out this calf"; a pitiful fumbling
speech: The Holy Ghost saith, Aaron had made them naked; "had
made them naked unto their shame," for he, as also Adam, should,
being chief and lord in their place, have stoutly resisted the
folly and sin which was to them propounded; and not as persons of
a womanish spirit, have listened to wicked proposals.[13]

Ver. 13. "And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that
thou hast done?" &c.,

Forasmuch as Adam did acknowledge his sin, though with much weakness
and infirmity, God accepts thereof; and now applieth himself to
the woman, whom Satan had used as his engine to undo the world.

Hence observe, That when God sets to search out sin, he will
follow it from the seduced to the seducer, even till he comes to
the rise and first author thereof, as in the following words may
more clearly appear. Not that he excuseth or acquitteth the seduced,
because the seducer was the first cause, as some do vainly imagine;
but to lay all under guilt who are concerned therein: the woman
was concerned as a principal, therefore he taketh her to examination.

"And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast
done?" What is this? God seems to speak as if he were astonished
at the inundation of evil which the woman by her sin had overflowed
the world withal: "What is this that thou hast done!" Thou hast
undone thyself, thou hast undone thy husband, thou hast undone all
the world; yea, thou hast brought a curse upon the whole creation,
with an overplus of evils, plagues, and distresses.

"What is this that thou hast done!" Thou hast defiled thy body and
soul, thou hast disabled the whole world from serving God; yea,
moreover, thou hast let in the devil at the door of thy heart, and
hast also made him the prince of the world. "What is this that thou
hast done!" Ah! little, little do sinners know what they have done,
when they have transgressed the law of the Lord. I say, they little
know what death, what plagues, what curse, yea, what hell they, by
so doing, have prepared for themselves.

"What is this that thou hast done!" God therefore, by these words,
would fasten upon the woman's heart a deep sense of the evil of her
doings. And indeed, for the soul to be brought into a deep sense
of its sin, to cry out before God, Ah! what have I done! it is with
them the first step towards conversion: "Acknowledge thy iniquity
[saith God] that thou hast transgressed against me" (Jer 3:13).
And again, "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness"
(1 John 1:9). The want of this is the cause of that obdurate and
lasting hardness that continueth to possess so many thousands
of sinners, they cry not out before God, What have I done? but
foolishly they rush into, and continue in sin, "till their iniquity
be found to be hateful," yea, their persons, because of their sin.

"What is this that thou hast done?" By this interrogatory the Lord
also implieth an admonition to the woman, to plead for herself,
as he also did to her husband. He also makes way for the working
of his bowels towards her, which (as will be shewn anon) he
flatly denies to the serpent, the devil: I say he made way for
the woman to plead for, or bemoan herself; an evident token that
he was unwilling to cast her away for her sin: "I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself;--I will surely have mercy upon
him, saith the Lord" (Jer 31:18-20). Again, by these words, he
made way for the working or yearning of his own bowels over her;
for when we begin to cry out of our miscarriages, and to bewail
and bemoan our condition because of sin, forthwith the bowels of
God begin to sound, and to move towards his distressed creature,
as by the place before alleged appears. "I have surely heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself;--therefore my bowels are troubled for
him: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord." See also
the 11th and 14th chapters of Hosea.

"And the woman said, the serpent beguiled me and I did eat." A
poor excuse, but an heart affecting one; for many times want of wit
and cunning to defend ourselves, doth affect and turn the heart
of a stander-by to pity us. And thus, as I think, it was with
the woman; she had to do with one that was too cunning for her,
with one that snapt her by his subtilty or wiles; which also the
woman most simply confesses, even to the provoking of God to take
vengeance for her.

Ver. 14. "And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou
hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every
beast of the field."

The serpent was the author of the evil; therefore the thunder
rolls till it comes over him, the hot burning thunder-bolt falls
upon him.

The Lord, you see, doth not with the serpent as with the man
and his wife; to wit, minister occasion to commune with him, but
directly pronounceth him cursed above all, "above every beast of the
field." This sheweth us, that as concerning the angels that fell,
with them God is at eternal enmity, reserving them in everlasting
chains under darkness. Cursed art thou: By these words, I say,
they are prevented of a plea for ever, and also excluded a share
in the fruits of the Messiah which should afterwards be born into
the world (Heb 2:2).

"Because thou hast done this, cursed art thou." "Because thou hast
done this": Not as though he was blessed before; for had he not
before been wicked, he had not attempted so wicked a design. The
meaning then is, That either by this deed the devil did aggravate
his misery, and make himself the faster to hang in the everlasting
chains under darkness; or else by this he is manifested to us to
be indeed a cursed creature.

Further, "Because thou hast done this," may also signify how great
complacency and content God took in Adam and his wife while they
continued without transgression; But how much against his mind and
workmanship this wicked work was. 1. Against his mind; for sin so
sets itself against the nature of God, that, if possible, it would
annihilate and turn him into nothing, it being in its nature point
blank against him. 2. It is against his workmanship; for had not
the power of the Messias stept in, all had again been brought to
confusion, and worse than nothing: as Christ himself expresses it:
"The earth, and all the inhabitants thereof, are dissolved: I bear
up the pillars of it" (Psa 75:3). And again, "He upholdeth all
things by the word of his power" (Heb 1:3).

Besides, this being done, man, notwithstanding the grace of God,
and the merits of Jesus Christ, doth yet live a miserable life in
this world; for albeit that Christ hath most certainly secured
the elect and chosen of God from perishing by what Satan hath
done; yet the very elect themselves are, by reason of the first
transgression, so infested and annoyed with inward filth, and so
assaulted still by the devil, and his vassals the proper children
of hell, that they groan unutterably under their burthen; yea,
all creatures, "the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain
together until now" (Rom 8:22). And that most principally upon the
very account of this first sin of Adam; it must needs be therefore,
this being so high an affront to the divine majesty, and so
directly destructive to the work of his hands; and the aim of the
devil most principally also at the most excellent of his creation
(for man was created in God's own image) that he should hereat
be so highly offended, had they not sinned at all before, to bind
them over for this very fact to the pains of the eternal judgment
of God.

Ver. 15. "And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou
shalt bruise his heel."

The woman may, in this place, be taken either really or figuratively;
if really and naturally, then the threatening is also true, as
to the very natures of the creatures here under consideration,
to wit, the serpent and the woman, and so all that come of human
race; for we find that so great an antipathy is between all such
deadly beasts, as serpents and human creatures, that they abiding
in their own natures, it is not possible they should ever be
reconciled: "I will put enmity": I will put it. This enmity then
was not infused in creation, but afterwards; and that as a punishment
for the abuse of the subtlety of the serpent; for before the fall,
and before the serpent was assumed by the fallen angels, they were,
being God's creatures, "good," as the rest in their kind; neither
was there any jarring or violence put between them; but after the
serpent was become the devil's vizor, then was an enmity begot
between them.

"I will put enmity between thee and the serpent." If by woman,
we here understand the church, (but then we must understand the
devil, not the natural serpent simply,) then also the threatening
is most true; for between the church of God, and the devil, from
the beginning of the world, hath been maintained most mighty wars
and conflicts, to which there is not a like in all the blood shed
on the earth. Yea, here there cannot be a reconciliation, (the
enmity is still maintained by God): The reason is, because their
natural dispositions and inclinations, together with their ends and
purposes, are most repugnant each to other, even full as much as
good and evil, righteousness and sin, God's glory, and an endeavour
after his utter extirpation.

Indeed, Satan hath tried many ways to be at amity with the church;
not because he loves her holiness, but because he hates her welfare,
(wherefore such amity must only be dissembled,) and that he might
bring about his enterprise, he sometimes hath allured with the
dainty delicates of this world, the lusts of the flesh, of the eyes,
and the pride of life: This being fruitless, he hath attempted to
entangle and bewitch her with his glorious appearance, as an angel
of light; and to that end hath made his ministers as the ministers
of righteousness, preaching up righteousness, and contending for
a divine and holy worship (2 Cor 11:12-15): but this failing also,
he hath taken in hand at length to fright her into friendship
with him, by stirring up the hellish rage of tyrants to threaten
and molest her; by finding out strange inventions to torment and
afflict her children; by making many bloody examples of her own
bowels, before her eyes, if by that means he might at last obtain
his purpose: But behold! all hath been in vain, there can be no
reconciliation. And why, but because God himself maintains the
enmity?

And this is the reason why the endeavours of all the princes and
potentates of the earth, that have through ignorance or malice
managed his design against the church, have fallen to the ground,
and been of none effect.

God hath maintained the enmity: doubtless the mighty wonder, that
their laws cannot be obeyed;[14] I mean their laws and statutes,
which by the suggestion of the prince of this world they have made
against the church: But if they understood but this one sentence,
they might a little perceive the reason. God hath put enmity
between the devil and the woman; between that old serpent called,
The Devil and Satan, and the holy, and beloved, and espoused wife
of Christ.

"I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and her seed." The seeds here are the children of both, but that
of the woman, especially Christ (Gal 3:16). "God sent forth his
Son made of a woman" (Gal 4:4). Whether you take it literally or
figuratively; for in a mystery the church is the mother of Jesus
Christ, though naturally, or according to His flesh, He was born of
the virgin Mary, and proceeded from her womb: But take it either
way, the enmity hath been maintained, and most mightily did shew
itself against the whole kingdom of the devil, and death, and
hell; by the undertaking, engaging, and war which the Son of God
did maintain against them, from his conception, to his death and
exaltation to the right hand of the Father, as is prophesied of,
and promised in the text, "It shall bruise thy head."

"It shall bruise thy head." By head, we are to understand the
whole power, subtilty, and destroying nature of the devil; for as
in the head of the serpent lieth his power, subtilty, and poisonous
nature; so in sin, death, hell, and the wisdom of the flesh, lieth
the very strength of the devil himself. Take away sin then, and
death is not hurtful: "The sting of death is sin": And take away
the condemning power of the law, and sin doth cease to be charged,
or to have any more hurt in it, so as to destroy the soul: "The
strength of sin is the law" (1 Cor 15:56). Wherefore, the seed,
Jesus Christ, in his bruising the head of the serpent, must take
away sin, abolish death, and conquer the power of the grave. But
how must this be done? Why, he must remove the curse, which makes
sin intolerable, and death destructive. But how must he take away
the curse? Why, by taking upon Him "flesh," as we (John 1:14); by
being made "under the law," as we (Gal 4:4); by being made "to be
sin for us" (2 Cor 5:21), and by being "made a curse for us" (Gal
3:10-13). He standing therefore in our room, under the law and
the justice of God, did both bear, and overcome the curse, and so
did bruise the power of the devil.

"It shall bruise thy head." To bruise is more than to break;
he shall quash thy head to death; so he also quashed the heel of
Christ; which would, had not his eternal power and Godhead sustained,
have caused that he had perished for ever.

"And thou shalt bruise his heel." By these words, a necessity was
laid upon Jesus Christ to assume our flesh, to engage the devil
therein; and also because of the curse that was due to us for sin,
that he might indeed deliver us therefore; even for awhile to fall
before this curse, and to die that death that the curse inflicteth:
"Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us." Thus therefore did Satan, that is, by the fruits
and effects of sin, bruise, or kill, the flesh of Christ: But he
being God, as the Father, it was not possible he should be overcome.
Therefore his head remaineth untouched. A man's life lieth not
in his heel, but in his head and heart; but the Godhead being the
head and heart of the manhood, it was not possible Satan should
meddle with that; he only could bruise his heel; which yet by the
power of the Godhead of this eternal Son of the Father, was raised
up again from the dead: "He was delivered for our offences, and
was raised again for our justification" (Rom 4:25).

In these words therefore the Lord God gave Adam a promise, That
notwithstanding Satan had so far brought his design to pass, as to
cause them by falling from the command, to lay themselves open to
the justice and wrath of God; yet his enterprise by grace, should
be made of none effect. As if the Lord had said, "Adam, thou seest
how the devil hath overcome thee; how he, by thy consenting to his
temptation, hath made thee a subject of death and hell: but though
he hath by this means made thee a spectacle of misery, even an
heir of death and damnation: yet I am God, and thy sins have been
against me. Now because I have grace and mercy, I will therefore
design thy recovery. But how shall I bring it to pass? Why I will
give my Son out of my bosom, who shall in your room, and in your
nature encounter this adversary, and overcome him. But how? Why,
by fulfilling my law, and by answering the penalties thereof.
He shall bring in a righteousness which shall be "everlasting,"
by which I will justify you from sin, and the curse of God due
thereto: But this work will make him smart, he must be made "a man
of sorrows," for upon him will I lay your iniquities (Isa 53:6);
Satan shall bruise his heel."

Ver. 16. "Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy
sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow[15] shalt thou bring forth
children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule
over thee."

"I will greatly multiply thy sorrow," &c. This is true, whether
you respect the woman according to the letter of the text, or as
she was a figure of the church; for in both senses their sorrows
for sin are great, and multiplied upon them: The whole heap of the
female sex know the first,[16] the church only knows the second.

"In sorrow shalt thou bring forth children." The more fruitful,
the more afflicted is the church in this world; because the rage
of hell, and the enmity of the world, are by her righteousness
set on fire so much the more.

But again: Forasmuch as the promise is made before this judgment
of God for sin is threatened, we must count these afflictions not
as coming from the hand of God in a way of vengeance, for want of
satisfaction for the breach of the law; but to shew and keep us in
mind of his holiness, that henceforth we should not, as at first
through ignorance, so now from notions of grace and mercy, presume
to continue in sin.

I might add, That by these words it is manifest, that a promise of
mercy and forgiveness of sin, and great afflictions and rebukes
for the same, may and shall attend the same soul: "I will greatly
multiply thy sorrow," comes after the promise of grace.

"And thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee." Doubtless the woman was, in her first creation, made in
subordination to her husband, and ought to have been under obedience
to him: Wherefore, still that had remained a duty, had they never
transgressed the commandment of God; but observe, the duty is
here again not only enjoined, and imposed, but that as the fruit
of the woman's sin; wherefore, that duty that before she might do
as her natural right by creation, she must now do as the fruits
of her disobedience to God. Women therefore, whenever they would
perk it and lord it over their husbands, ought to remember, that
both by creation and transgression they are made to be in subjection
to their own husbands. This conclusion makes Paul himself: "Let
[saith he] the woman learn in silence with all subjection. But I
suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man,
but to be in silence; for Adam was first formed, then Eve; and
Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the
transgression" (1 Tim 2:11-14).

Ver. 17. "And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened
unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which I
commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the
ground for thy sake, in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days
of thy life."

God having laid his censure upon the woman, he now proceedeth and
cometh to her husband, and also layeth his judgment on him: The
judgment is, "Cursed is the ground for thy sake," and in sorrow
thou shalt eat thereof. The causes of this judgment are, First,
For that "he hearkened to his wife": And also, "For that he had
eaten of the tree."

"Because thou hast hearkened to thy wife." Why? Because therein
he left his station and headship, the condition which God had
appointed him, and gave way to his wife to assume it, contrary to
the order of creation, of her relation, and of her sex; for God
had made Adam lord and chief, who ought to have taught his wife,
and not to have become her scholar.

Hence note, That the man that suffereth his wife to take his place,
hath already transgressed the order of God.[17]

"Because thou hast hearkened to the voice," &c. Wicked women, such
as Eve was now, if hearkened unto, are "the snares of death" to
their husbands; for, because they are weaker built, and because the
devil doth easier fasten with them than with men, therefore they
are more prone to vanity and all mis-orders in the matters of God,
than they; [the men] and so, if hearkened unto, more dangerous
upon many accounts: "Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these
things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, who was
beloved of his God, nevertheless even him did outlandish [wicked]
women cause to sin" (Neh 13:26). "But there was none like unto
Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of
the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up" (1 Kings 21:25).

Hence note further, That if it be thus dangerous for a man to
hearken to a wicked wife, how dangerous is it for any to hearken
unto wicked whores, who will seldom yield up themselves to the lusts
of beastly men, but on condition they will answer their ungodly
purposes! What mischief by these things hath come upon souls,
countries and kingdoms, will here be too tedious to relate.

"Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and hast
eaten of the tree." That is, From the hand of thy wife; for it was
she that gave him to eat: "Therefore," &c. Although the scripture
doth lay a great blot upon women, and cautioneth man to beware of
these fantastical and unstable spirits, yet it limiteth man in his
censure: She is only then to be rejected and rebuked, when she doth
things unworthy her place and calling. Such a thing may happen, as
that the woman, not the man, may be in the right, (I mean, when
both are godly,) but ordinarily it is otherwise (Gen 21:12).
Therefore the conclusion is, Let God's word judge between the man
and his wife, as it ought to have done between Adam and his, and
neither of both will do amiss; but contrariwise, they will walk
in all the commandments of God without fault (Luke 1:6).

"Therefore cursed be the ground for thy sake." Behold what arguments
are thrust into every corner, thereby to make man remember his
sin; for all the toil of man, all the barrenness of the ground,
and all the fruitlessness after all; What is it but the fruits of
sin? Let not us then find fault with the weed, with the hotness,
coldness, or barrenness of the soil; but by seeing these things,
remember our sin, Cursed be the ground "for thy sake"; for this God
makes our "heaven as iron," and our "earth as brass" (Exo 26:19).
"The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust; from
heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed" (Deu
28:20-24).

"In sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life." He then
is much deceived, who thinks to fill his body with the delicates
of this world, and not therewith to drink the cruel venom of asps:
Yea, "He shall suck the poison of asps, the viper's tongue shall
slay him" (Job 20:16). The reason is, because he that shall give
up himself to the lusts and pleasures of this life, he contracts
guilt, because he hath sinned; which guilt will curdle all his
pleasures, and make the sweetest of them deadly as poison.

"In sorrow shalt thou eat." Even thou that hast received the promise
of forgiveness: How then can they do it with pleasure, who eat,
and forget the Lord? (Pro 30:9; 31:5).

Again, Let not the sorrows, crosses, and afflictions, that attend
the godly in the things of this life, weaken their faith in the
promise of grace, and forgiveness of sins; for such things may
befal the dearest Christian.

Ver. 18. "Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee;
and thou shalt eat the herb of the field."

This shews us (as I also hinted before), That the thorns and thistles
of the ground, are but as the excrements thereof; and the fruits
of sin, and the curse for sin. This world, as it dropt from the
fingers of God, was far more glorious than it is now: Now it is
loaden with a burden of corruption, thorns, thistles, and other
annoyances, which Adam knew none of in the days of his innocency.
None therefore ever saw this world, as it was in its first creation,
but only Adam and his wife; neither shall any ever see it, until
the manifestation of the children of God: that is, until the
redemption or resurrection of the saints: but then it shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty
of the children of God.

"And thou shalt eat the herb of the field." These words are for
his comfort, under all the sorrow sin should bring upon him; "Thou
shalt eat the herb": The herb was a type of the gosepl-comforts
which the destroying angels were forbidden to smite (Rev 7:3). Of
these medicinal and healing herbs therefore Adam and his seed are
admitted to eat, that their soul may be replenished in the midst
of their sorrow.

Ver. 19. "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou
return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust
thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return."

"In the sweat of thy face." This is true, whether literally or
allegorically understood: For as touching the things that pertain
to this life, as they become not ours without toil and labour; so
the spiritual comforts of the kingdom of heaven are not obtained
without travail and sweat: "Labour [saith Christ] for the bread
and meat which endureth to everlasting life" (John 6:27).

"In the sweat of thy face." Those that make conscience of walking
in the commandments of God, they shall be blessed with the bread of
life, when others shall be hunger-bit. That may also be mystically
applied, "On all hills that shall be digged with the mattock,
there shall not come thither the fear of briars and thorns; but
it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading
of lesser cattle" (Isa 7:25). The meaning is, Where people are
diligent according to the word of God, especially in spiritual and
heavenly things, they shall be fat and flourishing, though sorrow
be mixed therewith: "When men are cast down: then thou shalt say,
there is lifting up; and he shall save the humble person" (Job
22:29).

"Till thou return to the ground." A Christian should not leave off
sweating labour so long as he is above the ground; even until he
returneth thither, he ought to be diligent in the way and worship
of God. Jacob, when sick, would worship God, though so weak as
not able to do it, without leaning upon the top of his staff: A
blessed example for the diligent, and reproof for those that are
slothful (Heb 11:21).

"For out of it wast thou taken." That is, out of the ground. Behold
how the Lord doth mix his doctrine! Now he tells him of his sin,
then he promiseth to give him a Saviour, then again he shews him
the fruits of his sin, and immediately after the comforts of the
promise; yet again, he would have him remember that he is but a
mortal creature, not to live here for ever; neither made of silver
nor gold, but even of a clod of dust: "For dust thou art." Observe
therefore, that in the midst of all our enjoyments, God would have
us consider our frame, that we may know how frail we are.

"For out of it was thou taken." It is hard for us to believe it,
though we daily see it is the way even of all the earth, to return
thither again: "For dust thou art, and to dust shalt thou return."

Whether this was spoken to Adam, as a judgment, or a mercy, or
both, is not hard to determine, (this first premised, that Adam
had received the promise;) for as it was the fruit of sin, so a
judgment and a token of God's displeasure; "for the wages of sin
is death" (Rom 6:23). But as it is made by the wisdom of God, a
prevention of further wickedness, and a conveyance through faith
in Christ, to a more perfect enjoyment of God in the heavens; so
it is a mercy and blessing of God (Isa 57:1,2); For thus "to die
is gain." Wherefore thus we may praise the dead, that are already
dead, more than the living, which are yet alive (Eccl 4:2). This
made Paul desire to depart; for he knew that through death was
the way to have more perfect sight of, and more close and higher
communion with the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit in the
heavens (2 Cor 5:6). I have a desire to depart, and be with Christ,
which is far better (Phil 1:21-23). Thus therefore those things
that in their own nature are the proper fruits and wages of sin,
may yet through the wisdom of God be turned about for our good
(Jer 24:5); but let not this embolden to sin, but rather minister
occasion to us to magnify the wisdom of God (Rom 8:28).

Ver. 20. "And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the
mother of all living."

By this act Adam returneth to his first station and authority
in which God had placed him, from which he fell when he became a
scholar to his wife; for to name the creatures, was in Adam a note
of sovereignty and power: This he attained to, as an effect of his
receiving the promise; for before the promise is received, man
cannot serve God in his station, because as he wanteth the power
of will, so also a good understanding; but when he hath received
the promise, he hath also received the Holy Ghost, which giveth to
the godly to know and do his duty in his station: "The spiritual"
man discerneth, and so "judgeth all things"; but he is not discerned
nor judged of any (1 Cor 2:15).

And he called his wife's name Eve, or Hevah: Because she gave
life to, or was the first mother of all mankind. This then admits
of two positions. First, That the world was created when Adam
was created. And, Secondly, That there were none of the sons of
men in the world before Adam, as some have not only vainly, but
irreligiously and blasphemously suggested. "Eve is the mother of
all living": Not a man therefore that is the son of man, but had
his being since the woman was made.

Ver. 21. "Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make
coats of skins, and clothed them."

By this action the Lord God did preach to Adam, and to his wife,
the meaning of that promise that you read of in verse 15. Namely,
That by the means of Jesus Christ, God himself would provide
a sufficient clothing for those that accept of his grace by the
gospel: The coats here, being a type of that blessed and durable
righteousness.

"The Lord God made the coats." Not Adam now, because now he is
received into a covenant of grace with God: Indeed before he entered
into this covenant, he made his own clothing, such as it was, but
that could not cover his nakedness; but now the Lord will make
them: And "unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make
coats": "Their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord" (Isa 54:17).
Of me, that is, of my providing, of my performing. And this is
the name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS"
(Jer 23:6).

"He made them coats, and clothed them." As the righteousness by
which a sinner stands just in the sight of God from the curse, is
a righteousness of God's providing; so also it is of his putting
on. No man can put on the righteousness of Christ, otherwise
than by God's imputation: if God reckon it ours then it is ours
indeed; but if he refuseth to shew that mercy, who can impute that
righteousness to me? Blessed are they to whom the Lord imputeth
righteousness (Rom 4). Cursed then must they needs be to whom God
hath not imputed the righteousness of his Son. "The Lord clothed
them," according to that of Paul, "Christ is made unto us of God
wisdom and righteousness," &c. (1 Cor 1:30). And of that God who
hath made him thus to us, even of him are we in Christ Jesus.

Did the Lord God make coats of skins. The coats were made of the
skins of beasts, of the skins of the slain, which were slain either
for food only, or for sacrifice also: This being so, the effects
of that promise mentioned before were by this action the more
clearly expounded unto Adam; to wit, That Christ, "in the fulness
of time," should be born of a woman clothed with flesh; and as so
considered, should be made a curse, and so die that cursed death
which by sin we had brought upon ourselves; the effects and fruits
of which should to us be durable clothing; that is, "Everlasting
righteousness" (Dan 9:24). Ver. 22, 23. "And the Lord God said,
Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and
now, [therefore] lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the
tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: therefore the Lord God
sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from
whence he was taken."

"Behold the man is become as one of us." These words respect the
temptation of the devil; the argument that prevailed with Adam;
and the fruits of their consenting: And therefore I understand them
as spoken ironically, or in derision to Adam. As if God had said,
"Now Adam, you see what a god you are become: The serpent told you
"you should be as gods," as one that was infinite in wisdom. But
behold, your godhead is horrible wickedness, even pollution of body
and soul by sin. A thing you little thought of when you pleased
yourself with the thought of that high attainment; and now if
you be not prevented, you will proceed from evil to evil; for
notwithstanding I have made promise of sending a Saviour, you will,
through the pollution of your mind, forget and set at nought my
promise; and seek life and salvation by that tree of life which
was never intended for the justification of sinners; therefore I
will turn you out of the garden, "to till the ground whence thou
wast taken.""

1. Hence observe, That it often falls out, after the promised
blessing is come, that God yet maketh us to possess our former
sins, not that the guilt thereof might be charged to condemnation,
but that remembering of them, we might blush before God, and be
the more effectually driven to a continual embracing of the mercy
promised.

2. Observe again, That as God would have us to remember our former
sins, so he would not that we should feed upon ought but the very
mercy promised. We must not rest in shadowish sacraments, as the
typical tree of life, but must remember it is our duty to live by
faith in the promised seed.

3. Observe also, That even our outward and temporal employments,
if they be lawful and honest, are so ordered of God, as that we
may gather some heavenly mystery from them: "To till the ground
from whence he was taken": Mysteriously intimating two things to
Adam. (1.) That seeing he was of the earth, he stood in as much
need to be ordered and dressed by God, in order to his future
happiness, as the ground, in order to its thrift and fruitfulness.
(2.) Again, Seeing he was taken from the ground, he is neither
God, nor angel, but a poor earthen vessel, such as God can easily
knock in pieces, and cause to return to the ground again. These
things therefore Adam was to learn from his calling, that he might
neither think too highly of himself, nor forget to live by faith,
and depending on the Lord God, to be blessed of him.

Ver. 24. "So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the
garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every
way, to keep the way of the tree of life."

"So he drove out the man." Adam was loth to forsake this garden of
Eden, because there was the tree of life. The promise will hardly
satisfy, where faith is weak and low. Had this man with great
faith received and retained the gospel preached before, he would
not have so hankered after a shadow; but the conscience being
awakened, and faith low and weak there, because faith wants the
flower or bloom of assurance, the ceremonial or moral law doth
with ease engender bondage.

"And he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and
a flaming sword." This shows the truth of what I said before; to
wit, That Adam was loth to forsake the garden, loth to forsake
his doing of something; but God sets a shaking sword against him,
a sword to keep that way, or to prevent that Adam should have life
by eating of the tree of life.

Observe, This tree of life, though lawful for Adam to feed on before
he had transgressed, yet now is wholly forbidden him; intimating,
that that which would have nourished him before he brake the law,
will now avail him nothing as to life before the justice of God:
the tree of life might have maintained his life before he sinned;
but having done that, he hath no ways now but to live by faith in
the promise; which that he might effectually do, God takes from
him the use of all other things, he driveth him out of the garden,
and sets to keep him from the tree of life, "Cherubims, and a
flaming sword."

"And he placed at the east of the garden Cherubims, and a flaming
sword." These cherubims are one sort of the angels of God, at this
time made ministers of justice, shaking the flaming sword of God's
severity against Adam for sin, threatening to cut him off thereby,
if he ever return by the way that he went.

We read also, that the law was delivered to Israel from Sinai, by
the hand and disposition of angels (Acts 7); the gospel, only by
the Son himself (Heb 1:2).

To keep the way. Hence the apostle implicitly concludes it a way,
that is, to death and damnation; by opposing another against it,
even the new and living one; a new, not this the old; a living
one, not this the dead one (Heb 10). For, for that the cherubims
are here placed with a flaming, shaking sword, to keep the tree
of life, it is evident that death is threatened to him that shall
at any time attempt to come at, or that seeks for life that way.

"A flaming sword, turning every way to keep," &c. This still shews
us, that man, though he hath already received the promise, is yet
exceeding prone to seek life by another way than free grace by
Jesus Christ; to wit, either by the law he hath broken, or by the
law and Christ together; and so though not directly, yet "as it
were by the works of the law" (Rom 9:32). But all is to no purpose,
they are every way prevented. For, forsake the simplicity of the
promise in the gospel, and thou shalt meet with the stroke of
the justice of God; for that flaming sword of his vengeance, it
turneth every way, and therefore will in every way lay wrath upon
thee, if thou seek life by ought but Christ.

CHAPTER IV. Ver. 1. "And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived,
and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord."

Now we are come to the generation of mankind. "Adam knew his wife":
A modest expression; and it should teach us, in all such matters
where things are discoursed of, that are either the fruits of
sin, or the proper effects of man's natural infirmities, there to
endeavour the use of such expressions, as neither to provide to
lust, nor infect us with evil and uncivil communication. "Adam
knew his wife"; Jacob, Samson, David, and others, are said to go
in unto them. So as to our natural infirmities of the stool, the
scripture expression is, "When thou goest abroad to ease thyself,
thou shalt turn again and cover that which cometh from thee":
Modest and bashful expressions, and such as become the godly,
being those that are furthest off of occasioning evil, and nearest
to an intimation, that such infirmities bespeak us infirm and
imperfect creatures.

"And she conceived and bare Cain." The first sprout of a disobedient
couple, a man in shape, but a devil in conditions. This is he that
is called elsewhere, The child "of that wicked one" (1 John 3:12).

"And she said, I have gotten a man from the Lord." If Eve by these
words did only ascribe the blessing of children to be the gift of
God, then she spake like a godly woman; but if she supposed that
this man Cain was indeed the seed promised, then it shows, that
she in this was also deceived, and was therein a figure of all
such as make false and strange delusions, signs of the mercy of
God towards them: The man she thought she had got from the Lord
as a mercy, and to be a Saviour, he proved a man of the devil, a
curse, and to be a destroyer.

Ver. 2. "And she again bare his brother Abel, And Abel was a keeper
of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground."

Observe here, That the good child is not the first-born, but Abel,
[a breath] (1 Cor 1:27,28). God often doth as Jacob did, even
cross hands, in bestowing blessings, giving that which is best to
him that is least esteemed: For Cain was the man in Eve's esteem;
she thought, when she had him, she had got an inheritance; but as
for Abel, he was little worth; by his name they showed how little
they set by him. It is so with the sincere to this day; they
bear not the name of glory with the world: Cain with them is the
profitable son; Abel is of no credit with them, neither see they
form or comeliness in him; he is the melancholy, or lowering child,
whose countenance spoileth the mirth of the world: "The heart of
the wise is in the house of mournings; but the heart of fools is
in the house of mirth" (Eccl 7:4).

"And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the
ground." By this it seems yet further, that Cain was the man in
favour, even him that should, by his Father's intentions, have been
heir, and have enjoyed the inheritance: He was nurtured up in his
father's employment, but Abel was set in the lower rank.

It was also thus with Isaac and Jacob, Ishmael and Esau, being the
eldest, and those that by intention were to be heirs.

Now in the inheritance lay, of old, a great blessing: so that Esau in
losing his father's inheritance, lost also the blessing of grace,
and moreover the kingdom of heaven (Heb 12:16,17). Wherefore Cain
had by this the better of Abel, even as the Jews by their privileges
had the better of the Gentiles (Rom 3:1,2). But mark it, the blessing
of grace is not led by outward order, but by electing love: Where
the person then is under the blessing of election, be he the first
or the second son, the highest or lowest in the family, or whether
he be more or less loved of his friends, 'tis he that with Abel
hath the everlasting blessing.

Ver. 3. "And, in process of time, it came to pass that Cain brought
of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord."

Mark here, That the devil can suffer his children, in outward
forms of worship, to be godly and righteous men: Cain, a limb of
the devil, and yet the first in order that presents himself and
his service to God.

Cain brought of the fruit of the ground, as of wheat, oil, honey,
or the like; which things were also clean and good. Hence it is
intimated, that his offering was excellent; and I conceive, not at
all, as to the matter itself, inferior to that of Abel's; for in
that it is said that Abel's was more excellent, it is not with
respect to the excellency of the matter or things with which they
sacrificed, but with respect to Abel's faith, which gave glory
and acceptableness to his offering with God, "By faith he offered
unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain" (Heb 11:4).

"And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of
the fat thereof" &c.

Abel, last in appearance, but in truth the first in grace; as
it also is at this day: Who do so flutter it out as our ruffling
formal worshippers? Alas! the good, the sincere and humble, they
seem to be least and last; but the conclusion of the tragedy will
make manifest that the first is last, and the last first; for the
many are but called, the few are chosen.

"And the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering." Herein
are the true footsteps of grace discovered; to wit, the person must
be the first in favour with God, the person first, the performance
afterwards.

"And the Lord had respect to Abel." But how can God respect a
man, before he respect his offering? A man's gift (saith Solomon)
makes way for him: It should seem therefore that there lies no such
stress in the order of words, but that it might as well be read,
"The Lord had respect to Abel, because he respected his offering."

Answ. Not so: For though it be true among men, that the gift makes
way for the acceptance of the person, yet in the order of grace it
is after another manner; for if the person be not first accepted,
the offering must be abominable; for it is not a good work that
makes a good man, but a good man makes a good work. The fruit
doth not make a good tree, but "a good tree bringeth forth good
fruit." Make (saith Christ) the tree good, and his fruit good; or
the tree evil, and his fruit evil: Do men gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles? Had Abel been a thorn, he had not brought forth
grapes; had he been a thistle, he had not brought forth figs. So
then, Abel's person must be first accepted, and after that his
works.

Object. But God accepteth no man while he remains a sinner, but
all men are sinners before they do good works, how then could the
person of Abel be accepted first?

Answ. Abel was JUST before he did offer sacrifice. Just, I say, in
the sight of God. This God witnessed by testifying of his gift: "By
faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain,
by which he obtained witness that he was righteous": That is, God
by accepting of the gift of Abel, did testify that Abel was a
righteous man; for we know God "heareth not sinners": "The prayers
of the wicked are an abomination unto God." But Abel was accepted,
therefore he was righteous first.

Hence observe, That a man must be righteous before he can do any
good work.

Quest. Righteous! "With what righteousness?"

Answ. With the righteousness of faith. And therefore it is said,
that Abel had faith before he offered sacrifice. "By faith he
offered" (Heb 11:4). Where faith is made to precede or go before
the work which by faith he offered unto God.

Quest. But are not good works the righteousness of faith?

Answ. They are the fruits of faith: As here in the case of Abel;
his faith produced an offering; but before he gave his offering,
his faith had made him righteous; for faith respects a promise of
grace, not a work of mine: Now the promise of grace, being this,
that the seed of the woman, which is Christ, should destroy
the power of the devil; by this Abel saw that it was Christ that
should abolish sin and death by himself, and bring in "everlasting
righteousness" for sinners. Thus believing, he had accepted of
Christ for righteousness, which because he had done, God in truth
proclaims him righteous, by accepting of his person and performances
when offered.

Abel then presented his person and offering, as shrouding both, by
faith, under the righteousness of Christ, which lay wrapped up in
the promise; but Cain stands upon his own legs, and so presents
his offering. Abel therefore is accepted, both his person and his
offering, while Cain remains accursed.

Ver. 5. "But unto Cain, and to his offering, he [the Lord] had not
respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell."

Mark: As first Abel's person is accepted, and then his offering;
so first Cain's person is rejected, and afterwards his offering:
For God seeth not sin in his own institutions, unless they be
defiled by them that worship him; and that they needs must, when
persons by[18] themselves offer sacrifice to God, because then
they want the righteousness of faith.

This then made the difference betwixt Abel and his brother; Abel
had faith, but Cain had none. Abel's faith covered him with Jesus
Christ, therefore he stood righteous in his person before God: This
being so, his offering was accepted, because it was the offering
of one that was righteous.

"But unto Cain, and to his offering, the Lord had not respect."
Hence note, That a Christless man is a wicked man, let him be never
so full of actions that be righteous; for righteous actions make
not a righteous man, the man himself must first be righteous.[19]

Wherefore, though Cain was the eldest, and first in the worship;
yet Abel was the wisest, and the most acceptable therein.

"And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell." From these
words it may be gathered, that Cain had some evident token from the
observation of God's carriage towards both himself and brother;
that his brother was smiled upon, but he rejected: He was wroth:
wroth with God, and wroth with his brother. And indeed, before
the world hate us, they must needs hate Jesus Christ: "It hated
me [saith he] before it hated you" (John 15:18). He was wroth:
and why? Wroth because his sacrifice was not accepted of God: And
yet the fault was not in the Lord, but Cain: He came not before
the Lord, as already made righteous with the righteousness of
Christ, which indeed had been doing well, but as a cursed wicked
wretch, he thought that by his own good works he must be just
before the Lord.

The difference therefore that was between these worshippers,
it lay not in that they worshipped divers gods, but in that they
worshipped the same God after a diverse manner: The one in faith,
the other without; the one as righteous, the other as wicked.

And even thus it is between us and our adversaries: We worship not
divers gods, but the same God in a diverse manner: We according
to faith; and they according to their OWN INVENTIONS.[20]

"And Cain was wroth." This further shows us the force of the law,
and the end of those that would be just by the same; namely, That
in conclusion they will quarrel with God; for when the soul in its
best performances, and acts of righteousness, shall yet be rejected
and cast off by God, it will fret and wrangle, and in its spirit
let fly against God. For thus it judgeth, That God is austere and
exacting; it hath done what it could to please him, and he is not
pleased therewith. This again offendeth God, and makes his justice
curse and condemn the soul. Condemn it, I say, for imagining that
the righteousness of a poor, sinful, wretched creature, should be
sufficient to appease eternal justice for sin. Thus the law worketh
wrath, because it always bindeth our transgression to us, and still
reckoneth us sinners, and accursed, when we have done our utmost
to answer and fulfil it (Rom 4:15).

"And his countenance fell." However, an hypocrite, while God
forbeareth to smite him, may triumph and joy in his goodness; yet
when God shall pronounce his judgment according as he approve of
his act, he needs must lower and fall in his countenance; for his
person and gift are rejected, and he still counted a sinner.

Ver. 6. "And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why
is thy countenance fallen?"

These words are applied to Cain, for a further conviction of his
state to be miserable. "Why art thou wroth?" Is it because I have
not accepted thy offering? This is without ground, thy person is
yet an abomination to me: Must I be made by thy gift, which is
polluted, for and by thy person, to justify thee as righteous? Thou
hast not yet done well. Wherefore, Cain had no cause to be wroth;
For God rejected only that which was sinful, as was both his person,
and gift for the sake thereof: Neither had he grounds to lift up
his looks on high, when he came to offer his sacrifice; because he
came not as a man in a justify'd state. But "there is a generation
that are pure in their ow eyes, and yet is not washed from their
filthiness. There is a generation,--O how lofty are their eyes!
and their eyelids are lifted up" (Pro 30:12,13). Such an one, or
the father of these, was Cain; he counted himself clean, and yet
was not washed; he lifted up his looks on high, before he was
changed from his iniquity.

Ver. 7. "If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if
thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall
be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him." "If thou do well."
Why, is not worshipping of God, well-doing? It may, and may not,
even as the person that worships is found. If he be found righteous
at his coming to worship, and if he worship according to rule,
then he does well, then he is accepted of God; but if he be not
found righteous before, be you sure he cannot do well, let the
matter with which he worshippeth be wrong or right. "Who can bring
a clean thing out of an unclean?" (John 14:4). Let Cain be clean,
and his offering will be clean, because brought to God in a vessel
that is clean; but if Cain be unclean, all the holy things he
toucheth, or layeth up in his skirt, it is made unclean by the
uncleanness of his person: "And so is this nation before me, saith
the Lord; and so is every work of their hands, and that which they
offer there is unclean" (Haggai 2:11-14).[21]

Men therefore ought to distinguish between doing and well-doing,
even in the worship of God. All that worship do not do well, though
the matter of worship be good in itself. Cain's offering you find
not blamed, as if it had been of a superstitious complexion; but
he came not aright to worship. Why? he came not as one made righteous
before. Wherefore, as I have already touched, the difference
that lay between the gifts of Abel and Cain, was not in the gifts
themselves, but the qualifications of the persons. Abel's faith,
and Cain's works, made God approve and reject the offering: "by
faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain":
For, as I said, Faith in Christ, as promised to come, made him
righteous, because thereby he obtained "the righteousness of God";
for so was Christ in himself, and so to be to him that by faith
received and accepted of him: This, I say, Abel did; wherefore now
he is righteous or just before God. This being so, his offering is
found to be an offering of Abel the just, and is here said to obtain
witness even of God, that he was righteous, because he accepted
his gift.

Wherefore, he that does well must first be good: "He that doeth
righteousness is [must first be] righteous" (1 John 3:7). He
is righteous first; he is righteous even as Christ is righteous,
because Christ himself is the righteousness of such a person.
And so on the contrary; the reason why some men's good deeds are
accursed of God, it is because in truth, and according to the law,
the Lord finds sin in them; which sins he cannot pardon, because
he finds them not in Christ. Thus they being evil for want of
the righteousness of the Son of God, they worship God as sinners,
according to that of the apostle, Because they are not good,
therefore they do not good, no, not one of them (Rom 3:10-12).

The way therefore to do well, it is first to receive the mercy of
God in Christ; which act of thine will be more pleasing to the
Divine Majesty, than all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices: "I
will have mercy [saith God] I will have mercy, and not sacrifice"
(Matt 9:13; 12:7). This Cain did not understand, therefore he goes
to God in his sins, and without faith in the mercy of God through
Christ, he offereth his sacrifice. Wherefore because his sacrifice
could not take away his sin, therefore it still abode upon him.

But "if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door." This reasoning
therefore was much to Cain's condition; he would be wroth, because
God did not accept his offering, and yet he did not well: Now, if
he had done well, God, by receiving of his brother's sacrifice,
shows, he would have accepted him; for this is evident, they were
both alike by nature; their offerings also were in themselves one
as holy as the other: How then comes it to pass that both were
not accepted, they both offered to God? Why, Abel only sacrificed
well, because he first by faith in Christ was righteous: This
because Cain wanted, "sin abideth at his door."

"And to thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him."
That is if sin abideth at thy door still, to thee shall be his
desire; he shall love, pity, pray for thee, and endeavour thy
conversions; but thou shalt be lord over him, and shalt put thy
yoke upon his neck. This was Jacob's portion also; for after Esau
had got head, he broke Jacob's yoke from off his neck, and reigned
by nineteen or twenty dukes and princes, before there was any king
in Israel (Gen 27:40).

It is the lot of Cain's brood, to be lords and rulers first, while
Abel and his generation have their necks under persecution; yet
while they lord it, and thus tyrannically afflict and persecute,
our very desire is towards them, wishing their salvation: While
they curse, we bless; and while they persecute, we pray.

Ver. 8. "And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to
pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel
his brother, and slew him."

When Cain saw that by God's judgment Abel was the better worshipper,
and that himself must by no means be admitted for well-doing, his
heart began to be more obdurate and hard, and to grow into that
height of desperateness, as to endeavour the extirpating of all
true religion out of the world; which it seems he did, by killing
his brother, mightily accomplish, until the days of Enos; for
"then began men [again] to call upon the name of the Lord" (v 26).

Hence see the spite of the children of hell against God: They have
slain thy prophets, and digged down thine altars (1 Kings 19:10).
If they may have their wills, God must be content with their
religion, or none; other they will not endure should have show
within their reach, but with Cain, will rather kill their brother;
or with the Pharisees, kill their Lord; and with the evil kings
of old, will rather kill their sons and subjects. That the truth,
I say, may fall to the ground, and their own inventions stand
for acceptable sacrifices, they will not only envy, but endeavour
to invalidate all the true worship and worshippers of God in the
world; the which if they cannot without blood accomplish, they
will slay and kill till their cruelty hath destroyed many ten
thousands, even as Cain, who slew his brother Abel.[22]

And Cain talked with his brother. He had not a law whereby to
arraign him, but malice enough, and a tongue to set all on fire, of
which no doubt, by the goodly replies of his brother, was easily
blown up into choler and madness, the end of which was the blood
of his brother.

"And Cain talked with Abel," &c. To wit, about the goodness and
truth of his religion. For that the New Testament seems to import,
he slew him "because his works were righteous" (1 John 3:12); which
Abel, no doubt, had justified before his brother, even then when
he most set himself to oppose him. Besides this, the connection
of the relation importeth, he talked with him, he slew him; he
talked with him and slew him, purely upon a religious account,
because his works were righteous.

Hence note, That when wicked men have the head in the world,
professors had need be resolved to hazard the worst, before they
do enter debate with ungodly men about the things that pertain to
the kingdom of God. For behold here, words did not end in words,
but from words came blows, and from blows blood. The counsel
therefore is, "That you sit down first, and count up the cost,"
before ye talk with Cain of religion (Luke 14:27-33). "They make a
man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth
in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought" (Isa
29:21).

"And Cain talked with Abel his brother." With Abel his only brother,
who also was a third part of the world. But tyrants matter nothing,
neither nearness of kin, nor how much they destroy: "The brother
shall betray the brother to death," &c.

"And it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose
up against Abel his brother, and slew him." When they were in the
field, from home, out of the sight, and far from the help of his
father: Subtle persecutors love not to bite, till they can make
their teeth to meet; for which they observe their time and place.
Joseph was also hated of his brethren, but they durst not meddle
till they found him in the field (Gen 37:15). Here it is also that
the holy virgin falleth: He found her in the field,--and there
was none to save her (Deut 22:27).

Hence observe again, That be the danger never so imminent, and the
advantage of the adversary never so great, the sincere professor
of the truth stands his ground against wind and weather. Bloody
Cain daunted not holy Abel; no, though now he have his advantage of
him (Dan 3:16-18). He rose up against Abel his brother, and slew
him. "And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil,"
&c. (1 John 3:12). It is therefore hence to be observed, That it
is a sign of an evil way, be it covered with the name of the worship
of God, when it cannot stand without the shedding of innocent
blood. "Wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil."
Had his works been good, they had been accepted of God: He had
also had the joy thereof in his conscience, as doubtless Abel
had; which joy and peace would have produced love and pity to his
brother, as it was with his brother towards him; but his works
being evil, they minister to him no heavenly joy, neither do they
beget in him love to his brother; but contrariwise, his heart fill
his eye with evil also; which again provoketh (while it beholdeth
the godly carriage of Abel) the heart to more desperate resolutions,
even to set upon him with all his might, and to cut him off from
the earth. Thus the goodness of God's people provoketh to envy the
wicked heart of the hypocrite. As it was betwixt Saul and David;
for after Saul had seen that God had rejected him for his wickedness,
the more he hated the goodness of David: "And Saul saw and knew
that the Lord was with David" (1 Sam 18:8-15). "And Saul was yet the
more afraid of David; and Saul became David's enemy continually"
(v 29).

Ver. 9. "And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother?
And he said, I know not: Am I my brother's keeper?"

Cain thought it had been no more but to kill his brother, and his
intentions and desires must needs be accomplished, and that himself
should then be the only man. "Come, let us kill him, and the
inheritance shall be ours" (Mark 12:7). But stay, Abel was beloved
of his God, who had also justified his offering, and accepted it
as a service more excellent than his brother's. So then, because
the quarrel arose between them upon this very account, therefore
Abel's God doth reckon himself as engaged (seeing he is not) to
take up his servant's cause himself.

"And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother?" A
question not grounded on uncertainty, but proposed as a beginning
of further reasoning; and also to make way to this wicked wretch,
to discover the desperate wickedness of his bloody heart the more.
For questions that stand at first afar off, do draw out more of the
heart of another: and also do minister more occasion for matter,
than if they had been placed more near to the matter.

"Where is Abel?" God missed the acceptable sacrifices of Abel; Abel
was dead, and his sacrifices ceased, which had wont to be savoury
in the nostrils of God; Cain could not supply them; his sacrifices
were deficient, they were not of faith. Hence note, that if tyrants
should have their will, even to the destroying of all the remnant
of God, their sacrifices and worship would be yet before God as
abominable as they were before.

"And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel?" O dreadful question!
The beginning of Cain's hell, for now God entereth into judgment
with him. Wherefore, however this wretch endeavoured at first to
stifle and choke his conscience, yet this was to him the arrow
of death: Abel crieth, but his brother would not hear him while
alive, and now being dead God hears the cry of his blood. "When he
maketh inquisition for blood, he remembereth them: he forgetteth
not the cry of the humble" (Psa 9:12). Blood that is shed for the
sake of God's word, shall not be forgotten or disregarded of God:
"Precious in his sight is the death of his saints" (Psa 116:15).
"And precious shall their blood be in his sight" (Psa 72:14).

"Where is Abel thy brother?" This word, thy brother, must not be
left out, because it doth greatly aggravate his wickedness. He slew
"his brother"; which horrid act the very law and bond of nature
forbiddeth. But when a man is given up of God, it is neither this
nor another relation that will bind his hands, or make him keep
within the bound of any law. Judas will seek his master's, and
Absalom his father's blood. "Where is Abel thy brother?"

"And he said, I know not." He knew full well what he had done, and
that by his hands his brother's blood was fallen to the ground,
but now being called into question for the same, he endeavoureth
to plead ignorance before God. "I know not." When men have once
begun to sin, they know not where they shall end; he slew his
brother, and endeavours to cover his fact with a lie. David also
little thought his act of adultery would have led him to have
spilt the blood of Uriah, and afterwards to have covered all with
dissembling lips and a lying tongue (2 Sam 11).

"I know not: am I my brother's keeper?"

This is the way of all ungodly men, they will not abide that guilt
should be fastened. Sin they love, and the lusts and delights
thereof, but to count for it they cannot abide; they will put it
off with excuses, or denials: Even like Saul, who though he had
spared the cattle and Agag contrary to the command of God, yet
would needs bear Samuel down, that he had kept, yea "performed the
commandment of the Lord" (1 Sam 15:13,20). But they are denials to
no boot, and excuses that will not profit, that are made to hide
the sin of the soul from the sight and judgment of God. Lies and
falsehood will here do nothing.

Ver. 10. "And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy
brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground."

Poor Cain, thy feeble shifts help thee nothing, thy excuses are
drowned by the cries of the blood which thou hast shed.

"What hast thou done?" the blood of thy brother cries. Beware
persecutors, you think that when you have slain the godly, you are
then rid of them; but you are far wide, their blood which you have
shed, cries in the ears of God against you. O the cries of blood
are strong cries, they are cries that reach to heaven; yea they
are cries that have a continual voice, and that never cease to
make a noise, until they have procured vengeance form the hands
of the Lord of sabbath (Job 16:18): And therefore this is the word
of the Lord against all those that are for the practice of Cain:
"As I live, saith the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto blood
and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood, [that
is, hated to shed it,] even blood shall pursue thee" (Eze 35:6).

"The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me." The apostle
makes this voice of the blood of Abel, a type of the voice of the
justice of the law, and so extends it further than merely to the
act of murder; intimating that he sheds blood, that breaks any of
the commands of God, (and indeed so he doth, "he layeth wait of
his own blood, and privily lurketh for his own life" (Prov 1:18)).
Wherefore the apostle compareth the blood of Abel and the blood
of Christ together; but so as by the rule of contraries, making
betwixt them a contrary voice, even as there is between a broken
command and a promise of grace, the one calling for vengeance and
damnation; the other calling for forgiveness and salvation; "the
blood of sprinkling it speaketh better things than the blood of
Abel" (Heb 12:24); that is, it calls to God to forgive the sinner;
but Abel's blood, of the breach of the law, that cries damn them,
damn them. Christ also sets his own blood in opposition to the
blood of all that was shed before him; concluding that the proper
voice of all the blood of the godly, is to call for vengeance
on the persecutors, even from the blood of Abel to the blood of
Zecharias, that was slain between the altar and the temple (Matt
23:35). And let me here take leave to propound my private thoughts:
namely, that the Zecharias that here is mentioned, might not be
he that we find in the book of Chronicles (2 Chron 24:21); but
one of that name that lived in the days of Christ, possibly John
Baptist's father, or some other holy man. My reasons for this
conjecture, are, 1. Because the murderers are convict by Christ
himself: Zecharias, whom ye slew between the altar and the temple.
2. Because Christ makes a stop at the blood of Zecharias, not
at the blood of John the Baptist: wherefore, if the person here
mentioned were not murdered after, but before John the Baptist,
then Christ seems to excuse them for killing his servant John;
for the judgment stops at the including of the guilt of the blood
of Zecharias. 3. I think such a thing, because the voice of all
holy blood that hath been shed before the law by the adversary,
excepting only the blood of Jesus, must needs be included here;
the proper voice of his, only being to plead for mercy to the
murderers. However, the voice of blood is a very killing voice, and
will one day speak with such thunder and terror in the consciences
of all the brood of Cain, that their pain and burthen will be for
ever insupportable.

Ver. 11. "And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened
her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand."

Here begins the sentence of God against this bloody man; a sentence
fearful and terrible, for it containeth a removing of him from
all the privileges of grace and mercy, and a binding of him over
to the punishment and pains of the damned.

"And now art thou cursed from the earth." Peace on earth, is one
branch of those blessed tidings that were brought into the world,
at the coming of the Messias (Luke 2:14). Again, before Christ
was come in the flesh, it is said, He rejoiced "in the habitable
part of his earth" (Pro 8:30). Wherefore, by the earth in this
place, I understand the state that the men are in, to whom, by the
mind of God, the gospel and grace of God is to be tendered. Now,
whether it respect that state of man by nature, or the state of
those that are saints, from both these privileges Cain is separate,
as are all whom the Lord hath utterly rejected. Not but that yet
they may live long in the world, but God hath cut them off from
the earth, and all the gospel privileges therein, and set them in
the condition of devils; so that as to grace and mercy they are
separate therefrom, and stand as men, though alive, bound over to
eternal judgment. And as to their lives, it matters not how long
they live, there is "no sacrifice for their sins, but a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which
shall devour the adversaries" (Heb 10:26,27). So that I say, as
the devils be bound in hell, so such lie bound in earth; bound I
say in the chains of darkness, and their own obstinate heart, over
to the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God. Cain therefore by these words is denied the blessing of future
means of grace, and stands bound over to answer for his brother's
blood, which the ground had received form his cruel hand.

Ver. 12. "When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth
yield to thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou
be in the earth."

This is a branch, or the fruits of this wilful murder. Indeed, sins
carry in them not only a curse with respect to eternity, but are
also the cause of all the miseries of this life. "God turneth--a
fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein" (Psa 107:34).

"When thou tillest the ground." Sin committed doth not always
exclude the sinner from an enjoyment of God's mercies, but yet if
unrepented of, bringeth a curse upon them. "I will curse, [saith
God,] your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye
do not lay it to heart" (Mal 2:2). This also is the reason that the
table of some is made their snare, their trap, a stumbling-block
and a recompence unto them (Rom 11:9); men ought not therefore to
judge of the goodness of their state, by their enjoyment of God's
creatures, but rather should tremble while they enjoy them, lest
for sin they should become accursed to them, as were the enjoyments
of this wicked man.

"A fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth." The meaning
is, thou shalt not have rest in the world, but shalt be continually
possessed with a guilty conscience, which shall make thy condition
restless, and void of comfort. For the man that indeed is linked
in the chains of guilt and damnation, as Cain here was; he cannot
rest, but (as we say) fudge up and down from place to place,
because his burthen is insupportable. As David said, "Let their
eyes be darkened that they see not, and make their loins continually
to shake" (Psa 69:23). A continual shaking and restlessness doth
therefore possess such persons as are given up of God, and swallowed
up of guilt.

"A fugitive and vagabond shalt thou be in the earth." Some men
certainly know, even while they are in this world, their state
to be most miserable, and damnable, as Cain, Saul and Judas did;
which knowledge, as I have hinted, puts them besides the very
course of other carnal men; who while they behold them at quiet
under their enjoyments, these cannot but wonder, fear, and be
amazed with the deep cogitations which will abide upon them, of
their certain misery and everlasting perdition.

Ver. 13. "And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater
than I can bear." Or as the margin hath it, "Mine iniquity is
greater than that it may be forgiven." And both readings are true:
for however some men please themselves in lessening sin, and the
punishment thereof, yet a burdened conscience judgeth otherwise.
And if Cain failed in either, it was in that he counted his sin (if
he did so) beyond the reach of God's mercy. But again, when men
persecute the worship and people of God, as Cain did his blessed
and religious brother, even of spite, and because he envied the
goodness of his brother's work; I question whether it be lawful for
a minister to urge to such the promise of grace and forgiveness;
and also whether it be the mind of God such persons should hope
therein. He that sins the sin unto death, is not to be prayed for
(1 John 5:16), but contrariwise he is to be taken from God's altar
that he may die (Exo 21:14). This was Cain's case, and now he
knew it; therefore as one excluded of God from his mercy and all
the means thereof, he breaks out with roaring under the intolerable
burden of the judgment of God upon him, concluding his punishment at
present "greater than he could bear," and that yet his sin should
remain unpardonable for ever: As saith our Lord Jesus Christ, He
hath neither forgiveness here nor in the world to come (Matt 12:32).

Ver. 14. "Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face
of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; And I shall be a
fugitive and a vagabond in the earth, and it shall come to pass,
that every one that findeth me shall slay me."

By these words is confirmed what was said before, to wit, to be
cursed from the earth, was to be separate from the privileges of
the gospel. For Cain was not now to die, neither was he driven
into any den or cave; yet driven out from the face of the earth,
that is, as I have said, he was excluded from a share in those
special mercies that by the gospel were still offered by grace
to the others that inhabited the world: The mercies, I say, that
are offered by the gospel, as namely, The mercy of eternal life:
For as to the blessings of this world, he had yet a notable
share thereof. Besides, he groaneth under this judgment, as an
insupportable curse: "Thou hast driven me out this day from the
face of the earth." And indeed, if we take it according as I have
laid it down, it is a curse that would break the whole world to
pieces; for he that is denied a share in the grace that is now
offered, must needs be denied a portion in God's kingdom. And
this Cain saw; wherefore he adds in the process of his complaint,
"And from thy face shall I be hid": "I shall never come into thy
kingdom, I shall never see thy face in heaven." This is therefore
the highest of all complaints; namely, for a man from a certain
conviction that his condition must without fail be damnable, to
condole and bemoan his forlorn condition.

"Thou hast driven me out." O! when God shall bind one over for
his sin, to eternal judgment, who then can release him? This was
Cain's state, God had bound him over. The blood of his brother was
to rest upon him and not to be purged with sacrifice for ever.

"Thou hast driven me out THIS DAY." He knew by the sentence that
fell from heaven upon him, even from that very day that he was
made a companion of, and an associate with devils. This day, or
for this day's work, I am made an inhabitant of the pit with the
devil and his angels. Hence note, That God doth sometimes smite
the reprobate so apparently, that himself from that day may make
a certain judgment of the certainty of his damnation. Thus did
Balaam: "I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not
nigh" (Num 24:17). Where by now, he respects the time of grace;
and by nigh, the time or day of judgment: As who should say, "I,
for my sorceries, and wicked divinations, am excluded a portion in
the day of grace, and therefore shall not see the Saviour NOW: I
am also rejected, as to a portion in the blessed world to come:
and therefore when he judgeth, I shall not see him NIGH: Nigh, as
a friend, as a saviour to my soul." I doubt this is the condition
of many now alive, who for their perfidiousness and treachery to
Christ, and his church, have already received, even "in themselves,
that recompence of their error which was meet" (Rom 1:27).

Ishmael also, in the day he laughed at Isaac (Gen 21:9), and Esau
in the day he sold his birthright (Gen 27; 28), might have gathered,
the one from God's concurring with the judgment of Sarah, the
other, from his father's adhering to his brother; his adhering, I
say, in a prophetic spirit (Gal 4:29); that from thenceforth they
both were excluded grace and glory, as the apostle by the Holy
Ghost afterwards doth (Heb 12:16,17).

"And from thy face shall I be hid." By face here, we are to
understand God's favour, and blessed presence, which is enjoyed by
the saints both here, and in the world to come (Psa 4:6,7; 16:11).
Both which this wicked man, for the murdering of his brother, and
his envy to the truth, now knew himself excluded from.

"From thy face shall I be HID." The pit of hell, to which the
damned go, besides the torment that they meet with there, is such
a region of darkness, and at such a distance from the heavens, and
the glorious comfortable presence of God, that those that shall be
found the proper subjects of it, shall for ever be estranged from
one glimpse of him: besides, sin shall bind all their faces in
secret, and so confound them with horror, shame, and guilt that
they shall not be able from thenceforth for ever, so much as once
to think of God with comfort.

"From thy FACE." As it were all the glory of heaven, it lieth in
beholding the face of God: A thing the ungodly little think of;
yet the men that have received in themselves already the sentence
of eternal damnation, they know it after a wonderful rate; and
the thoughts of the loss of his face and presence, doth, do what
they can, as much torment them, as the thoughts of all the misery
they are like to meet withal besides.

"And a fugitive and a vagabond shall I be on the earth." Even from
the present frame of his spirit, Now, having received the sentence,
he knew, the judgment past being unrevokable, how it would be with
him all his life long; that he should spend his days in trouble
and guilt, rolling under the justice of God, being always a terror
and burthen to himself, to the day he was to be cut off from the
earth, that he might go to the place appointed for him.

"And it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth me shall
slay me." Guilt is a strange thing, it makes a man think that
every one that sees him, hath knowledge of his iniquity. It also
bringeth such a faintness into the heart (Lev 26:36), that the
sound of a shaken leaf doth chase such persons: and above all
things, the cries of blood are most fearful in the conscience; the
cries of the blood of the poor innocents, which the seed of Cain
hath shed on the face of the earth (Jer 2:34; 19:4). Thus far of
Cain's complaint.

Ver. 15. "And the Lord said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth
Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him seven-fold. And the Lord
set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him."

By these words, the judgment is confirmed, which Cain, in the verse
before, so mournfully pronounced against his own soul. As if the
Lord had said, "Cain, thy judgment is as thou hast said, I have
driven thee out this day from a share in my special favour; and when
thy life is ended, thou shalt be hid from my face, and a blessed
presence for ever; and seeing it is thus, therefore I will not
suffer that thou die before thy time: Alas, thy glass will be quickly
run! Besides, thy days, while thou art here, will sufficiently
be filled with vexation and distress; for thou shalt always carry
in thy conscience the cries of innocent blood, and the fear of
the wrath of God: I have said it, and will perform it: I am not
a man, that I should repent: So that thus shall thy judgment be:
Therefore he that killeth Cain, I will take vengeance on him."

Hence note, That none need to add to the sorrows of the persecutors.
They above all men are prepared unto wrath. Let them alone (saith
Christ) they will quickly fall into the ditch. Besides, God hath
taken the revengement of the blood of his servants into his own
hand, and will execute his wrath himself. Therefore he saith to his
saints (as in this case), "Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves,
but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is
mine, I will repay, saith the Lord" (Rom 12:19). And the reason
is, because the quarrel is in special between the prosecutor and
God himself. For we are not hated because we are men, nor because we
are men of evil and debauched lives; but because we are religious;
because we stand to maintain the truth of God. Therefore no man must
here intercept, but must leave the enemy in the hand of that God
he hath slighted and condemned. This made Moses that he meddled
not with Corah and his company, but left them to that new thing
which the Lord himself would do unto them, because they had
condemned the ordinance of God (Num 16:25-35). This made David
also that he meddled not with Saul, but left him to the vengeance
of God, though he had opportunity to have destroyed him (1 Sam
24 and 26:10-12). Let us learn therefore to be quiet and patient
under the hand of wicked and blood-thirsty men. Let us fall before
them like holy Abel; it is and will be grief enough to them,
that when we are dead, our blood will cry from the ground against
them.[23]

"Therefore he that killeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken," &c. He
now that shall, after this admonition, plead for religious blood
with the sword, vengeance shall be taken on him, because he giveth
not place to the wrath of God, but intercepts with his own, which
"worketh not the righteousness of God" (James 1:19,20). Say therefore
with David, when you are vexed with the persecutor, Mine hand
shall not be upon him; but "as the Lord liveth, the Lord shall
smite him; or, his day shall come to die; or, he shall descend in
battle, and perish."

"Vengeance shall be taken on him seven fold." It would not be hard
to shew how little they have prevailed, who have taken upon them
to take vengeance for the blood of saints, on them that have been
the spillers of it. But my business here is brevity, therefore I
shall not launch into that deep, only shall say to such as shall
attempt it hereafter, "Put up thy sword into his place; for all they
that take the sword shall perish with the sword"! (Matt 26:52).
And "here is the patience and faith of the saints" (Rev 13:10).
Let Cain and God alone, and do you mind faith and patience; suffer
with Abel, until your righteous blood be spilt: even the work of
persecutors, is, for the present, punishment enough; the fruits
thereof being the provoking God to jealousy, a denying of them the
knowledge of the way of life, and a binding of them over to the
pains and punishment of hell.

"And the Lord set a mark upon Cain." What the opinion of others is
about this mark, I know not; to me it seems like those in Timothy,
who had "their conscience seared with a hot iron" (1 Tim 4:2).
Which words are an allusion to the way of the magistrates in their
dealing with rogues and felons; who that they may be known to
all, are either in the hand, shoulder, or cheek branded with a hot
iron. So Cain was marked of God for a reprobate, for one that had
murdered a righteous man, even of envy to the goodness of his
work: But the mark (as it was on those in Timothy) was not on any
outward or visible part of his body, but (as there the apostle
expresseth it) even upon his very conscience; his conscience then
had received the fire-mark of the wrath and displeasure of God,
which, as a burning iron doth to the flesh, had left such deep
impression therein, that it abode as a scar or brand upon him, in
token that good would for ever after hold him for a fugitive rogue
or vagabond.

"And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should
kill him." For though the mark was branded with burning upon his
conscience, and so inward and invisible; yet the effects of this
hot iron might be visible, and seen of all: the effects, I say,
which were, or might be, his restlessness in every place, his
dejectedness, the sudden and fearful pangs and agonies of his
mind, which might break out into dolorous and amazing complaints;
besides, his timorous carriage before all he met, lest they should
kill him; gave all to understand, that God had with a vengeance
branded him. And indeed this was such a mark as was amazing to
all that beheld him, and did ten times more make them afraid of
spilling blood, than if any visible mark had been set upon him;
of for by his trouble and distress of mind, they saw, what was
the guilt of blood: and by his continual fear and trembling under
the judgment of God, what it was to be in fear of, nay, to have
the first fruits of everlasting damnation. Thus therefore God
reserved Cain to the judgment which he had appointed for him.

Ver. 16. "And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, and
dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden."

The right carriage of a reprobate, and the infallible fruits of
final desperation. For a man that hath received in his mind the
stroke of the judgment of God, and that is denied all means of
saving and sanctifying grace, (as the great transgressors are,)
the presence of God is to such most dreadful; whether we understand
the knowledge of him as he is in himself, or as he discovereth
himself in his church; for the thought of his being, and eternal
majesty, keeps the wound open, and makes terror and guilt revive.
To such it would be the best of news, to hear that the Godhead
doth cease to be, or that themselves were high above him. But that
they are in the hand of the living God, this is the dreadful and
fearful thought.

"And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord." These words may
be taken many ways.

1. That he separated himself from the church (the place of God's
presence) (2 Cor 6:16) which then consisted of his father and
mother, and of those other children they had. And this appears by
the text, "He went out from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in
the land of Nod."

2. A man goes out from the presence of God, when he withdraws his
thoughts from holy meditations, and employeth the strength of his
mind about the things of this life (Job 21:14-18). And thus he
also did; he went into the land of Nod, and there fell to building
a city, and to recreate himself with the pleasures of the flesh
what he might.

3. A man goes out from the presence of God, when he throweth up
the worship and way of God; and this he did in departing from the
church (2 Chron 19:1-3).

4. Besides, his going out from the presence of the Lord, implieth,
that he hardened his heart against him, that he set his spirit
against him; that he said to God, Depart from me (Heb 3:12); that
he grew an implacable enemy to him, and to every appearance of
good in the world (Job 15:12,13).

"And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord." These words may
also respect his being thrust out from God, as one anathematized,
accursed, or cut off, in effect the same with excommunication.
But be it so, the act was extraordinary, being administered by God
himself; even as he served Corah and his company, though in kind
there was a difference, the one, even Cain, being yet permitted to
live for a while in the world; the other being sent down quick into
hell; but both, for their villany against the worship and people
of God, stand bound over to answer it at the eternal judgment.

Ver. 17. "And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch:
and he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the
name of his son, Enoch."

Cain's wife was his sister, or near kinswoman; for she sprang of
the same loins with himself; because his mother was "the mother
of all living" (Gen 3:20).

This wife bare him a son; for whose sake, as it seems, he built
the city. Hence note, That men who are shut out of heaven, will
yet use some means to be honourable on earth. Cain being accursed
of God, yet builds him a city; the renown of which act, that it
might not be forgotten, he calleth it after the name of his son.
Much like this was that carnal act of blasted Absalom; because
he had no child, he would erect a pillar, which must forsooth be
called Absalom's place, after the name of Absalom, to keep his
name in remembrance upon earth (2 Sam 18:18).

"And he builded a city," &c. Note, That it is the design of Satan,
and the deceitful heart of man, to labour to quiet a guilty
conscience, not by faith in the blood of Christ, but by over much
business in the things of this world.

"And called the name of the city, after the name of his son,
Enoch." Although Cain had a mind to keep up his name with fame in
the world, yet he would not venture to dedicate the city to his
own name; that would have been too gross; and perhaps others would
have called it, The CITY OF THE MURDERER; but he calleth it after
the name of his son, his son Enoch; whom he pretended was a man
both taught, and dedicate, as it seems his name imports. Hence
note again, That men who themselves are accursed of God, will yet
put as fair glosses on their actions, as their hypocritical hearts
can invent. Who must this city be dedicated to, but to him whom
Cain had dedicated and taught. I will not say that in truth he
gave him to God, for that his reprobate heart would not suffer;
but being given up of God, yet retaining, with Saul, considerations
of honour: therefore, as is the custom of ungodly hypocrites, he
would put the best show on his ungodly actions.

Thus Saul, when he had received the sentence of the Lord against
him; yet, Turn again with me (saith he to Samuel) "yet honour me
now before--the people, and before Israel" (1 Sam 15:30). So the
money wherewith the high priests and scribes had bought the life,
and obtained the death of Christ; with that they make some shew of
godliness, in buying with it a piece of ground to bury strangers
in (Matt 27:3-7).

Ver. 18. "And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael:
and Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech."

These are the offspring of Cain; the English of whose names, if the
nature and disposition of the persons were according, they might
well be called, with abhorrence, the brood of wicked Cain, even
the generation whom the Lord had cursed, notwithstanding Enoch was
their father. Enoch begat Irad, a wild ass; Irad begat Mehujael,
one presumptuous above measure, his name signifies, one teaching
God. But "who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord?" (Isa 40:13). Or
"Shall any teach God knowledge?" (Job 21:22). The son of this man
was Methusael, asking death, the true fruit of all such presumptuous
ones, "his confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and
it shall bring him to the king of terrors" (Job 18:14). His son
was Lamech, one poor or smitten: The first, that, as we read, did
break the order of God in the matter of marriage.

Ver. 19. "And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one
was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah."

This man was the first that brake the first institution of God
concerning marriage. "He took unto him two wives." The New Testament
says, Let every man have his own wife. And so said the law in its
first institution: therefore plurality of wives first came into
practice by the seed of cursed Cain, and for a time was suffered
in the world through the hardness of man's heart.

Ver. 20, 21. "And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as
dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle. And his brother's name
was Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and
organ."

Jabal signifies bringing, or budding; Jubal, bringing or fading. So
then in these two sons might be shewed unto us the world, as it is
in its utmost glory: that is, it brings buds, it brings fading:
today in the field, tomorrow in the oven: "All flesh is grass,
and all the goodliness thereof, is as the flower of the field.
The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the Spirit of the
Lord bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass" (Isa 40:6-8).

And observe in these, the last was the musical one. Indeed, the
spirit of the world, after things have budded, is so far off from
remembering that they again must fade; that then it begins its
Requiem; then it saith to itself, Eat, drink, and be merry; then
it is for handling the harp and organ (Luke 12:16-20).

Ver. 22. "And Zillah, she also bare Tubal-Cain, an instructor of
every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubal-Cain
was Naamah."

Tubal-Cain, a worldly possession; and Naamah, one that by her name
should be beautiful. Lamech his fruit then was, a budding, fading,
worldly possession, with a little deceitful, vain beauty, for
"favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth
the Lord, she shall be praised" (Pro 31:30). Ver. 23. "And Lamech
said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, hear my voice; ye wives
of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to my
wounding, and a young man to my hurt."

He that sticks not to exceed in one point, will not fear to transgress
in another. He had hardened his heart, by breaking the modest and
orderly bounds of marriage, and so fitted himself to shed blood,
or do any other wickedness.

"Hearken to me, ye wives." Lustful men break their minds to their
fleshly companions, sometimes, sooner than to wiser counsellors.
Even as Ahab, in the business of the vineyard of Naboth, breaks
his mind to that ungodly Jezebel his wife.

"I have slain a man to my wounding." Who, or what man this murdered
person was, therein the word is silent: yet this Lamech being the
son of a bloody murderer, it is possible he was some godly man,
one of Adam's other children, or of his grandchildren, the son of
Seth: for these sons of Cain, and namely this in special, as it
seems, took not heed to the mark wherewith God branded Cain; but
like Belshazzar, he hardened his heart, though he knew it, and
would turn murderer also (Dan 5:18-22).

"I have slain a man to my wounding." The guilt of blood who can
bear? or who can help himself thereby? It is a wounding thing, it
is a hurtful thing, he that sheds man's blood wrongfully, cannot
establish himself thereby (Matt 22:6,7). The Jews thought to have
preserved themselves and country by killing Jesus Christ; but this
so provoked the justice of God, that for this thing's sake he sent
the Gentiles upon them to burn up their city; who when they were
come, if stories be true, slew of them eleven hundred thousand;
and those of them that were taken alive, were sold to who would
buy them, Thirty a penny. "Ye shed blood [says God] and shall ye
possess the land? Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination,
and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife: and shall ye possess
the land?" (Eze 33:25,26).

Ver. 24. "If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy
and sevenfold."

Though wicked men may be willingly ignorant of that part of the
judgments of God, that are to premonish them, that they do not that
wicked thing for which the judgment was executed; yet if there be
anything like favour mixed with the judgment, of that they will
take notice, to encourage themselves to evil: even as this ungodly
person, he would not be stopped from blood by the judgment of God
upon Cain; but rather, as it seems, because the judgment was not
speedily executed, his heart was fully set in him to do evil (Eccl
8:11). Much like that of the Jews, who because Jehoiakim had slain
Uriah the prophet, and yet God spared the land; therefore make
that an argument to prevail with Zedekiah to kill Jeremiah also
(Jer 26:20-23).

"If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and
sevenfold." Give wicked men leave to judge of themselves, and they
will pass a sentence favourable enough. Though Lamech had not pity
when he spilt blood; yea, though the judgment of God upon Cain
could not hold his murderous hands: yet now he is guilty, let him
but make a law in the case, and woe be to him that killeth Lamech:
Vengeance shall be taken of him seventyfold and seven. Joab could
with pitiless hands spill the blood of men more righteous than
himself, not regarding what became of their souls: but when his
blood was by vengeance required for the same, then he would take
sanctuary at the horns of the altar (1 Kings 2:28). But judgment
is not wholly left to me, the Lord is judge himself; before whom
both Cain and Lamech, and all their successors, shall be arraigned,
and receive just doom, and that never to be reversed.

Ver. 25. "And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and
called his name Seth: for God, said she, hath appointed me another
seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew."

Now we have done, for a while, with Cain, and are come again to
the church of God. Cain had slain Abel, and by that means, for a
while, had greatly suppressed the flourishing of religion; in which
time his own brood began to be mighty upon earth; so increasing,
as if religion was put to an end for ever. But behold their
disappointment! "Adam knew his wife again," (for Adam's family was
then the true church of God;) or take Adam for a type of Christ,
and his wife for a type of the church, and then this observation
followeth; namely, That so long as Christ and the church hath to
do with one another, it is in vain for Cain to think of suppressing
religion.

"Adam knew his wife again." If Eve had now been barren, or Adam
had died without farther issue, then Cain might have carried the
day; but behold another seed! a seed to stand in Abel's place:
therefore she called his name Seth; that is, Set or Put, as namely, in
the room of Abel, to stand up for, and to defend the truth against
all the army and power of Cain. As Paul also saith of himself,
"I am set, [or put,] for the defence of the gospel" (Phil 1:17).
This man therefore, so far as can be gathered, was the first that
put check to the outrage of Cain and his company. But mark some
observations about him.

1. He was set in the stead or place of Abel; not an inch behind
him, but even at the place where his blood was spilt. So that he
that will revive lost religion, must avow it as God's Abels have
done before him: every talker cannot do this. The blood that was
shed before his face, must not put check to his godly stomach; yea,
he must say to religion, as Ruth said once to her mother, "Where
thou diest, I will die, and there will I be buried" (Ruth 1:17).
This is the way to revive and to maintain the ways of God, in
despite of bloody Cain.[24]

2. This Seth that was set to put check to Cain, did not do it
of his own brain, but the hand of God was principal in the work.
"God," said she, "hath appointed me another seed to be set in the
place of Abel." And indeed it is otherwise in vain, when religion
is once suppressed, to think it should ever revive again. Alas!
where is the man, if he want God's Spirit, that will care for the
flourishing state of religion? and that in truth will make the Lord
his delight: "This is Zion, whom no man seeketh [for, or seeketh]
after" (Jer 30:17). All men here say, "See to thine own house,
David" (1 Kings 12:16). But when Seth comes, then the ground is
made good again; then a living saint is found to stand and maintain
that truth which but now his brother bled for. When James was
killed, Peter stands up, &c. (Acts 12:1-3). And therefore Seth
is said to be another seed, a man of another spirit: One who was
principled with a spirit beyond and above the spirit of the world.
"Another seed," one that was spirited for God's word, and God's
worship, and that would maintain his brother's cause.

3. Observe, That when Seth maintains his brother's lot, you hear
no more of the brood of Cain. And indeed, the way to weary out
God's enemies, it is to maintain and make good the front against
them: "Resist the devil, and he will fly" (James 4:7). Now if
the Captain, their king Apollion, be made to yield, how can his
followers stand their ground? "The dragon,--the devil, Satan,--he
was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him"
(Rev 12:9). But how? It was by fighting: "Michael and his angels
fought against the dragon;--and overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and by not loving of
their lives unto the death" (Rev 12:7,8,12).

4. Let this, in the last place, serve for persecutors, That when
you have cast down many ten thousands, and also the truth to the
ground; there is yet a Seth, another seed behind, that God hath
appointed to stand in the stead of his brethren, by whom you will
certainly be put to flight, and made to cease from oppressing the
truth.

Ver. 26. "And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he
called his name Enos: Then began men to call upon the name of the
Lord."

The Holy Ghost, in recording the birth of Enos, goeth out of his
ordinary style, in that he doubleth the mentioning of his father,
with respect to the birth of this son. And indeed it is worth the
observing; for it staggereth the faith of some, to think that the
man that makes good the ground of a murdered brother, should not
leave issue behind him: But "to Seth, to him was born a son." Our
faithfulness to the truth, shall be no hindrance to the flourishing
state of our offspring, take them either for the fleshly or spiritual
seed of God's servants, but sons, (especially in the latter sense,
if we truly stand by the word of God) shall surely be born unto
us.

"And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his
name Enos." Enos, a man; not a devil, like Cain, but a man; or, a
man that was miserable in this world, for the sake and cause of
God;[25] for it seems, as was his father, so was he, even both
given up to maintain God's truth; which cannot be done but with
great hazard, so long as Cain or his offspring remain. His father
therefore, by his very name, did offer him up to bear all hardships
for the name and cause of God: "Behold I send you forth [saith
Christ] as lambs in the midst of wolves." In effect, he called
their name Enos, men to be acquainted with grief and miseries:
But mark, "Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord."

"Then," when Seth maintained Abel's ground, and when Enos endured
all miseries for the same: For indeed this makes spectators believe
that religion is more than a fictitious notion: The hardships,
miseries, and blood of the saints, will make men, otherwise heedless,
consider and ponder their cause aright.

"Then began." For, as I also before have hinted, the outrage of
bloody Cain did put, for a time, a stop to the flourishing state
of God's worship; which in all probability was not so little as
half a hundred years, even till Seth, and the son of Seth, stood
up to maintain the same; but "then, THEN men began [more men than
Seth and Enos] to call upon the name of the Lord."

Note again, That all true religion beginneth with fervent prayer:
Or thus, That when men begin to be servants to God, they begin it
with calling upon him. Thus did Saul, "Behold he prayeth" (Acts
9): And, "Lord have mercy upon me," is the first of the groans of
a sanctified heart.

The margin hath it, "They began to call themselves by the name of
the Lord." As God saith in another place, "My name is called on
them." The disciples were called Christians, (nay, the saints are
called the anointed ones, and the church is called Christ) (1 Cor
12:12). But note, That fervent prayer ends in faith and confidence
in God. They called themselves by the name; they counted themselves
not from a vain and groundless opinion, but through the faith they
had in the mercy of God, The saints and holy people of God.

They began to publish themselves, in contradistinction to the
offspring of Cain, the holy people of God. Wherefore, a separation
from the wicked began betimes; the one going by the name of "the
sons of God"; the other, "by the sons and daughters of men" (6:1,2):
"Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord."

CHAPTER V.

Ver. 1. "This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day
that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him." The
Holy Ghost having thus largely treated of Cain and his offspring,
and of the head made against him by Seth and Enos, and of the
good success that followed, he now comes to treat of the church in
particular, and of the flourishing state of the same.

"This is the book." The Holy Ghost cuts off the genealogy of Cain,
accounting him none of the race of the church, although before he
was within the pale thereof. John observing this, calls him, "a
child of that wicked one" (1 John 3:12), as our Lord also accounted
Judas. Wherefore, he here begins his book again, that this wicked
race might be quite excluded. "Let them be blotted out of the book
of the living, and not be written with the righteous" (Psa 69:28).

"In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made
he him." Although by this new beginning the Holy Ghost excludeth
Cain, yet he fetcheth the genealogy of the church from the day that
man was created; intimating that God, in the very act of creation,
had a special intention to plant him a church in the world; and
therefore, even before sin was in the world, the image of God was
upon man, as a token of his special respect, and of the great
delight that he intended to take in that creature above all that
he had made (Pro 8:30,31).

Ver. 2. "Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and
called their name Adam, in the day when they were created."

When Adam was created, the Lord created two in one: So when Christ,
the head of the church, was chosen, the church was also chosen in
him.

"And blessed them." With the blessing of generation: A type of the
blessing of regeneration that was to be by Christ in the church,
according to that which is written, "So shall thy seed be" (Eph
1:4).

"And called their name Adam, in the day when they were created."
So that in the man the woman is included: "Neither is the man
without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord"
(1 Cor 11:11). For the Holy Ghost, in the work of the new creation,
of which this creation was a type, counteth not by male and female,
but "ye are all one in Christ Jesus" (Gal 3:28). Wherefore, women
are not to be excluded out of the means of salvation; nay, they
have, if they believe, a special right to all the promises of grace
that God hath made to his saints in all ages: Yea, "she shall be
saved in childbearing, [though she bear children,] if she continue
in faith, and charity, and holiness with sobriety" (1 Tim 2:15).

Ver. 3. "And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a
son in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth."

Here also by the book of Chronicles, the Holy Ghost carrieth away
the genealogy, because Abel had no children, saying Adam, Seth,
&c. (1 Chron 1:1).

"An hundred and thirty years." Behold the rage of hell! For until
Seth stood in Abel's place, religion was greatly hindered, and that
was after the world had stood an hundred and thirty years. Indeed,
Abel, while he had his breath, did hold it up in the world; but
Cain, who was of that wicked one, smote him and religion both to
the ground.

"And begat a son in his own likeness. Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean? not one" (Job 14:4). If the father be polluted
with the inward filth of sin, the son must needs be like him:
"I was shapen in iniquity; [said David] and in sin did my mother
conceive me" (Psa 51:5). Seth then was no better than we by nature,
but came into the world in the blood of his mother's filth: "What
is man, that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman,
that he should be righteous?" (Job 15:14).

This therefore should teach us not to count of our election, and
of our effectual calling but by the word of God. Seth by nature
was a sinful man, and yet the chosen servant of God; the first
that took up God's quarrel after the death of blessed Abel.

This should also help us to hold up the bucklers against the kingdom
of the devil and hell. Seth was subject to like infirmities with
us, and yet he got ground of the children of iniquity. I know a
sense of our own infirmities is apt to weaken our hand in so mighty
an undertaking, but it should not: Although we be like old Adam
by nature, yet God is able to make us stand.

Ver. 4. "And the days of Adam, after he had begotten Seth, were
eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters."

Adam therefore, as a type of Christ, reigned in the church almost
a thousand years. The world therefore beginning thus, doth shew
us how it will end; namely, by the reign of the second Adam, as
it began with the reign of the first.

These long-lived men therefore shew us the glory that the church
shall have in the latter day, even in the seventh thousand years
of the world, that sabbath when Christ shall set up his kingdom on
earth, according to that which is written, "They lived and reigned
with Christ a thousand years" (Rev 20:1-4). They:--Who? The church
of God, according also as it was with Adam. Therefore they are
said by John to be holy, as well as blessed: "Blessed and holy is
he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second
death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God, and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years" (v 6). In all
which time the wicked in the world shall forbear to persecute, as
did also the brood of wicked Cain in the days of Adam, Seth, &c.
Hence therefore we find in the first place the dragon chained for
these thousand years.

Ver. 5. "And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and
thirty years: and he died."

Adam therefore lived to see the translation of Enoch: In whose
translation a conquest was got over all the enemies of his soul
and body: So Christ shall reign in and among his saints till all
his enemies be destroyed. "The last enemy that shall be destroyed
is death" (1 Cor 15:26); which shall be swallowed up when the
members of that glorious head have put on incorruption, and their
"mortal shall have put on immortality." Adam's reigning therefore
until Enoch's translation, looks like a prophecy of the perfection
of Christ's kingdom: For he shall reign till he hath "delivered
up the kingdom to God, even the Father" (v 24): As Adam, till his
Enoch was translated and took up to God.

Ver. 6. "And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos."

Seth therefore stood by the truth of God, a long time, without
much help or encouragement from man; which was a great trial to
his spirit, and proof of the truth of his faith, and tended much
to the perfection of his patience. Somewhat like this was that of
Paul, who had no man stood with him when he stood before Nero.

Seth was set in the stead of Abel, to keep the gap against the
children of hell; which, by the grace of God, he faithfully did,
even till Enos was sent to his aid and assistance.

Seth therefore was the forlorn hope of the church in those days.
So set of God to put check to the enemy, until the church was
increased, and more able to defend herself from the outrage.

This therefore should teach the saints of God, especially those
that are sent before, against the offspring of Cain, to stand their
ground, and not to shrink like Saul, till God shall send others
to take part with them (1 Sam 10:8; 13:8-14).

Thus David stood, as it were, by himself, against the wicked that
was in his day; which made him cry, "Who will rise up for me against
the evil doers," or who will stand up for me against the workers
of iniquity? (Psa 94:16).

Ver. 7. "And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven
years, and begat sons and daughters."

Hence also we may gather great encouragement who are set in the
front of the army of the Lamb, against the army and regiment of
Cain. Seth, saith the Spirit, was set in the stead of Abel, there
as forlorn, to defend religion: Must he not now be swallowed up?
Will the blood-hounds let him escape? Behold, therefore his life
must be accounted a wonder! As was also that of Paul (1 Cor 6:9).
But for Seth to stand eight hundred years against such a murderous
crew, and yet to have his breath in his nostrils! Our times are in
thy hands, and thou, Lord, "holdeth our soul in life" (Psa 66:9).

"And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years, and
he died" (v 8).

His life was therefore eighteen years shorter than that of Adam;
he lived fifty-five years after Enoch, and died six hundred and
fourteen years before the flood.

Ver. 9. "And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan." Cainan
signifieth a buyer, or owner. Let it be with respect to religion,
and then the sense may be, that he had this privilege in religion
by the hazard of his father and grandfather's life; they bought
it for him, and made him the owner of it: As Paul saith, He gave
not place to the false Apostles, "that the truth of the gospel
might continue with the Galatians" (2:5). As Jotham also said to
Shechem, "My Father fought for you, and adventured his life far,
and delivered you out of the hand of Midian" (Jude 9:17). Namely,
that they might still be owners of the inheritance that the Lord
had given them. This shews us then, that the fruit of a constant
standing to the word of God, is, That the generations yet unborn
shall be made the possessors and owners of it.

Ver. 10. "And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and
fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters."

He lived then to see his son enjoy the fruits of his own constancy
to the truth, so long a time as eight hundred years, &c. as we hope
God's people now may do. 'Tis true, they now do own the truth with
hazard, and do hold it up by enduring much misery, according to
the rage of wicked men; but, I say, 'tis hoped others will reap
the fruits of our travails, and that some of us shall live to see
it, as Enos lived to see his Cainan possess religion eight hundred
years.[26]

Ver. 11. "And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five
years: and he died."

He lived then one hundred fifty-three years after Enoch, and died
five hundred and sixteen years before the flood.

Ver. 12. "And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel."

Mahalaleel, signifieth praising God. Wherefore he was born in
settled times, wherein religion met with little or no molestation. It
began to be as hereditary in the days of blessed Cainan; wherefore
it was requisite that the very next that should possess the truth,
should spend their days in praising God (Rev 11:15). And thus it
will be at the downfall of Antichrist: "After this [saith John] I
heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying Allelujah;
Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power unto the Lord our
God...And a voice came out of the throne saying, Praise our God,
all ye his servants; and ye that fear him, both small and great"
(Rev 19:1-6).

"The whole earth [saith the Prophet] is at rest and is quiet, they
break forth into singing. Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thee, [O
thou brood of the blood-thirsty Cain,] and the cedars of Lebanon,
saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us"
(Isa 14:7,8).

Ver. 13. "And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred
and forty years, and begat sons and daughters."

God gave him a long possession and enjoyment of the fruits of his
father's labours. They sowed (as Christ said) and he was entered
into their labours: They sowed in tears, and he reaped in joy.
Mahalaleel, or praise our God, was the language of those times.

Ver. 14. "And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten
years: and he died."

He lived then two hundred and forty-eight years after Enoch, and
died four hundred twenty-one years before the flood.

Ver. 15. "And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat
Jared."

Jared signifies ruling, and sheweth us what is the holy fruits of
peace and thanksgiving in the church; to wit, government according
to the testament of Christ (Acts 9:31). It is hard to have all
things according to rule, in the day of the church's affliction;
because of the weakness and fearfulness of some; and because possibly
those who have most skill in that matter, may for a time be laid
up in chains: but now when the church hath rest and quietness,
then as she praiseth God, so she conceiveth and bringeth forth
governors, and good government and rule among her members. David,
a man of blood, could not build that house to the Lord, which
peaceable Solomon, that man of rest, afterwards did (1 Chron
28:3,6). When armies are engaged, and hot in battle, 'tis harder
to keep them in rank and file, than when they have rest, and time
for discipline. Jared therefore is the fruits of thanksgiving, as
thanksgiving is the fruits of peace and possession.

Ver. 16. "And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred
and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters."

He lived not only to give thanks unto God, but to shew to all that
he gave thanks in truth, by submitting his neck the rest of the
hundred of years that he lived, to the holy law and word of God.

A good rule to prove people by; for all that pretend to give thanks
for liberty, put not their neck under the yoke, but rather use
their liberty as an occasion for the flesh, than by love to serve
and advantage one another in the things of the kingdom of Christ
(Gal 5:13; 1 Peter 2:16). But as "the bramble said to the [rest
of the] trees," so saith Christ to such feigned thanksgivers, "If
in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and put your trust
in my shadow" (Judg 9:15). Submit to my law, and be governed by
my testament. Let your thanksgiving bring forth Jared, and walk
with God in the days of Jared.

Ver. 17. "And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety
and five years: and he died." He lived then three hundred and three
years after Enoch, and died three hundred and sixty-six years
before the flood.

Ver. 18. "And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he
begat Enoch."

Enoch, is taught, or dedicate: The true effect of rule or government,
be it good or bad: in Cain's posterity it was bad; "for an evil
tree cannot bring forth good fruit." By Enoch here, we are to
understand, one taught in, and dedicated unto, God. This Enoch
therefore was a son that would hear the rules, and submit to the
government of his father Jared. "As an ear-ring of gold, and an
ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear"
(Pro 25:12).

Ver. 19. "And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years,
and begat sons and daughters."

He lived therefore to see the fruit of his good rule and government
in the church, even to see his teachable and dedicated son caught
up to God, and to his throne. A good encouragement to all rulers
in the house of God, and also to all godly parents to teach and
rule in the fear of God; for that is the way to part with church
members, and children with comfort; yea, that is the way, if we
shall out-live them, to send them to heaven, and to God before
us.

Ver. 20. "And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and
two years: and he died."

He lived then three hundred thirty-five years after Enoch, and died
two hundred thirty-four before the flood.

Ver. 21. "And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah."

Methuselah signifieth, Spoiling his death: this therefore is the
true fruits of one that is truly taught in, and dedicate to the
service of God, as Enoch was; by this means he spoileth his death:
wherefore he adds, "And Enoch walked with God." Walking with God,
spoileth death, or overcomes it, or it shall be prevented, he shall
not be hurt therewith: As Christ saith, "If a man keep my saying,
he shall never taste death" (John 8:52).

Ver. 22. "And Enoch walked with God, after he begat Methuselah
three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters."

These words [after he begat Methuselah] may have respect either
to his beginning to walk with God, or to the number of the years
that he lived after the birth of Methuselah, or both.

If it respect the fist, then it sheweth that the only encouragement
that a sinner hath to walk with God, it is to see Methuselah,
or his death spoiled: for when a man seeth death, and all evils,
conquered and overcome, then his soul is encouraged in holiness
(1 Cor 15:55-58). No encouragement to walking with God like this:
"Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah." As Paul saith,
"Now being made free from sin,--[which indeed is the sting of
death] ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life" (Rom 6:22).

If it respect the second, then it shews us the invincible nature
of true faith, (for by faith Enoch walked with God:) I say, it
sheweth us the invincible nature of true faith, in that it would
hold up a man in close communion with God for the space of three
hundred years.

"He walked with God three hundred years." How will the conversation
of Enoch rise up in judgment with this generation, that walk not
with God at all! Or if they do, do it so by fits, as if walking
with God was but a work by the by.

"He walked with God and begat sons and daughters." And kept house,
and lived with his wife, according to knowledge. This shews then,
that it is sin, not our lawful and honest employment, that hindreth
one's walking with God.

Ver. 23, 24. "And all the days of Enoch were three hundred and
sixty and five years: And Enoch walked with God: And he was not;
for God took him" (vv 23,24).

The New Testament saith, "By faith Enoch was translated that he
should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated
him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he
pleased God."

"And all the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty and five
years." Enoch therefore lived here but a while; he was too good to
live long in this world, the world was not worthy of him; neither
would he be spared so long out of heaven, "for God took him." The
end of walking with God or the path-way thereof, it leads men to
heaven, to the enjoyment of the glory of God. Thus also it was
with blessed Elijah, he followed God from place to place, till at
length he was caught up into heaven (2 Kings 2:1-11).

A word or two more of Enoch. Jude observes, That he was the
seventh from Adam: Closely intimating (as I conceive) that by him
God prefigured the resurrection and end of the world: And intimated,
That in the seventh great day of the world this resurrection should
be, each generation from Adam being a type of a thousand years:
So that Enoch, the seventh from Adam, was a type of the seventh
thousand, in which the Lord will reign with his church a thousand
years.

There are two things in Enoch that incline me to this opinion. First,
he crieth out, "Behold the Lord comes!" and then is translated
that he should not see death. The right posture and end of those
that shall live at the day of God Almighty; and that shall, like
Enoch, be found "walking with God," when the Lord shall come from
heaven (Jude 14,15).

Ver. 25. "And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years,
and begat Lamech."

Lamech signifieth poor, or smitten; wherefore I doubt that the
apostacy that you read of in the next chapter, began either in the
days of, or by, this man: he being, as it seems, more dry and void
of grace than those that went before him; poor, or smitten.

Hence note, That faith and godliness, though often it goeth from the
father to the son, as from Seth to Enos, and from him to Cainan,
yet it is not tied here, but runs according to electing love, as
also do the fruits thereof.

Ver. 26, 27. "And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven
hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters. And
all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years,
and he died."

Methuselah, the spoiling of death, is the longest liver in the
world; yet he died in the year that the flood was upon the earth;
not by the flood, but by the course of nature, as also did Lamech
his son, for the wicked reprobate only was swept away by that,
according to the apostle Peter. Ver. 28, 29. "And Lamech lived an
hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son: and he called his
name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work
and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath
cursed."

"And he called his name Noah." Noah signifieth rest; his name
was therefore according to his work, for he was a preacher of
righteousness, which giveth rest to all that embraceth it. Besides,
it was he that prepared the ark, the place of rest to the church
of God.

"This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our
hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed."

These words seem to carry in them, repentance for the apostacy that
before was mentioned. "This same shall comfort us," by restoring
the church to her former rest, and by delivering us from the "toil
of our hands"; for sin once admitted of in the church, is not
without much toil extirpated, and driven forth of the same; yea
sometimes it getteth such footing and root, that it cannot again
be purged and destroyed, but by breaking the very being of the
church where it is. Thus it was as to the case in hand, and is
signified also by pulling down the house in which the leprosy was
(Lev 14:43-45). Yea Ephesus itself was almost thus far infected,
had not a threatening prevented (Rev 2:1-3).

"Because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed." The Lord did
curse it for the sin of Adam: He also renewed the curse to Cain,
because he was guilty of the blood of his brother. I incline also
to think, that the curse here mentioned, is the first, reiterated
for the grievous apostacy of this congregation; according to that
which is written, "If ye walk contrary unto me," "I will punish
you seven times more": "I will bring seven times more plagues upon
you, according to your sins" (Lev 26:18-21).

Ver. 30. "And Lamech lived after he begat Noah, five hundred ninety
and five years, and begat sons and daughters." Wherefore Lamech
heard the preaching of Noah, who was the only minister of God in
those days, to recover the church to repentance from their apostacy,
which also he did in some good measure effect, while he condemned,
the world for their unbelief (Heb 11:7).

Ver. 31. "And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy
and seven years: and he died." He died five years before the flood.
Methuselah therefore was the longest liver of those godly that fell
on the other side the flood, for he died not before the very year
the flood came, not by the water, but before. The righteous is
taken away from the evil to come; though, as the prophet saith,
no man of the wicked laid it to heart.

Ver. 31. "And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem,
Ham, and Japhet."

CHAPTER VI.

Ver. 1. "And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the
face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them."

Moses now leaveth the genealogy for a while, and searcheth into the
state and condition of the church now after so long a time as its
standing upwards of, or above, a thousand years: where he presently
findeth two things. 1. The church declined. 2. And God provoked.
Wherefore he maketh inquiry into the nature of the church's sin;
which he relateth in this following chapter.

"And it came to pass, when men began to multiply." The men here
I understand to be the children of Cain, the church and synagogue
of Satan, because they are mentioned by way of antithesis to the
church and sons of God.

"And daughters were born unto them." A snare that was often used
in the hand of the devil, to intangle withal the church of God;
yea, and doth so usually speed, that it hath often been counted
by him as infallible; so that this is the doctrine of his prophet
Balaam, and it prevailed, when all the engines of hell beside were
prevented. "The people began to commit whoredom with the daughters
of Moab" (Num 25:1,2). It may be this child of hell, in this his
advice to Balak looked back to the daughters of Cain, and calling
to remembrance how of old they intangled the church, advertised
him to put the same into practice again (Rev 2:14).

Ver. 2. "That the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they
were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose."

This was the way then of the sons of Cain, to let their fair
daughters be shewed to the sons of God (Pro 22:14). For it seems
all other their wiles and devices were not able to bring the church
and the world together, and to make them live as in one communion.
These to the church were such, whose hearts were snares and nets,
and whose hands were bands to intangle and hold them from observing
the laws and judgments of God (Eccl 7:26).

"And they took them wives." First their eye saw them, and then
their heart lusted after them. Thus the devil deceived the woman,
and by this means perished cursed Achan. "And Achan answered
Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord, and thus
and thus have I done: When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish
garment," &c., "then I coveted them" (Josh 7:20,21).

Note therefore, that it is not good to behold with the eye that
which God hath forbid us to touch with our hand. "I made a covenant
with mine eyes," saith Job (Job 30:1). And again, if at unawares
a thing was cast before him, the beholding of which was of an
intangling nature, he forthwith would hold back his heart as with
a bridle, lest the design of hell should be effected upon him (v
7).

Crush sin then in the conception, lest it bring forth death in thy
soul.

Ver. 3. "And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred
and twenty years."

By these words is aggravated the sin of the church, that she would
attempt to close with, and hold a sinful communion, against the
dissuasions of the Spirit of God.

"My Spirit shall not always strive." To wit, my Spirit in Noah, for
he was the only preacher of righteousness to the church in those
backsliding times.

By this then, I find, that the doctrine of Noah, was, To declare
against a sinful communion, or to command the church, in the
name of God, that she still maintain a separation from the cursed
children of Cain: As he said to the prophet Jeremiah, If thou
separate the precious from the vile, "thou shalt be as my mouth"
(15:19).

Noah therefore had a hard task, when he preached this doctrine
among them: for this above all is hard to be borne, for by this he
condemned the world.

The first great quarrel therefore that God had with his church,
it was for their holding unwarrantable communion with others. The
church should always "dwell alone, and not be reckoned among the
nations" (Num 23:9). The church is "a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people" (1 Peter 2:9).
Therefore the work of the church of God, is not to fall in with
any sinful fellowship, or receive into their communion the ungodly
world, but to shew forth the praises and virtues of him who hath
called them out from among such communicants into his marvellous
light.

"My Spirit shall not always strive." Hence note, that the people
that shall continue to grieve the Spirit of God, and to resist the
doctrine of Noah, they are appointed for heavy judgments. "Come
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues" (Rev 18:4). This because those
(finally impenitent) in Noah's time refused to do, therefore the
wrath of God overtook them, and swept them off the face of the
earth.

"Yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years." Noah therefore
began his preaching about the four hundred and fourscore year of
his life, which continuing the space of sixscore more, it reached
to the day that the flood came.

In which time doubtless his faith was sufficiently tried, both by
the hard censures of the hypocrites of the church, and the open
profane of the world, against whom he daily pronounced the judgments
of God for maintaining their forbidden communion (Gen 3:15).

"Yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years." God also would
yet have patience with these people, if peradventure they would
repent that his hand might not be upon them.

Ver. 4. "There were giants in the earth in those days; and also
after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of
men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men,
which were of old, men of renown."

"There were giants in the earth in those days." These words seem to
be spoken, to shew us the hazards that Noah ran, while he preached
the truth of God: He incurred the displeasure of the giants, which
doubtless made all men tremble, and kept the whole world in awe.
But Noah must engage the giants, he must not fear the face of a
giant. This way God took also with Moses, and with his people of
Israel, they must go to possess the land of the giants, a people
high and tall as the cedars, a people of whom went that proverb,
"Who can stand before the children of Anak?" (Deu 9:2). They must
not be afraid of Og the king of Bashan, though his head be as high
as the ridge of a house, and his bedstead a bedstead of iron (Deu
3:11).

This should teach us then not to fear the faces of men: no, not
the faces of the mighty; not to fear them, I say, in the matters
of God, though they should run upon us like a giant.

These giants I suppose were the children of Cain, because mentioned
as another sort than those that were the fruit of their forbidden
and ungodly communion: For he adds, "And also after that," or
besides them, "when the sons of God came in unto the daughters
of men, and they bare children to them, the same, [or they also]
became mighty men which were of old, men of renown."

Then Noah found giants every where: Giants in the world, and giants
in this confused communion. And thus it is at this day; we do not
only meet with giants abroad, among the most ungodly and uncircumcised
in heart, but even among those that seem to be of the religious,
among them we also meet with giants; men mighty to oppose the
truth, and very profound to make slaughter: But mark the advice of
the Lord, "Fear not their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord
of hosts himself, [who is stronger than all the giants that are
upon the face of the earth] and let him be your fear, and let him
be your dread" (Isa 8:12,13).

"And when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and
they bare children to them, the same became mighty men"; much
like to the giants. The fruit therefore of ungodly communion is
monstrous, and of a very strange complexion. They are like unto
them that worshipped the Lord, and served their own gods also (2
Kings 17:24,41); or like to those of the church, of whom Nehemiah
speaks, that had mixed themselves with the children of Ashdod,
Ammon and Moab, whose children were a monstrous brood, that spake
half the language of Ashdod, and could not speak the Jews' language
(Neh 13:23,24).

By both these sorts of giants was faithful Noah despised, and his
work for God condemned. In David's time also Goliath defied Israel,
and so did his brethren also (1 Sam 17:10). Giants, the sons of
the giant; but David and his servants must engage them, and fight
them, though they were giants (1 Chron 20:4-8).

"Mighty men which were of old." Persecution therefore, or the
appearance of the giants against the servants of God, is no new
business; not a thing of yesterday, but of old, even when Noah did
minister for God in the world. "There were giants in the earth in
those days," to oppose him.

"Men of renown." Not for faith and holiness, but for some other
high achievements, may be, mighty to fight, and to shed man's
blood; or to find out arts, and the nature of things; both which
did render them famous, and men to be noted in their place. Such
kind of men might be Corah, Dathan, and their company also; yet
they opposed Moses and Aaron, yea, God, his way and worship, and
perished after an unheard of manner (Num 16:1,2). As also did the
opposers of righteous Noah, in the day of the flood.

Ver. 5. "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was
only evil continually." The margin saith, "not only the imagination,
but also the purposes and desires."

These words are to be understood, as still respecting the apostacy
that we read of in the first and second verses, and are (in my
thoughts) to be taken as the effect of their degeneracy. For though
it be true, that the best of men, in their most holy and godly
behaviour, have wicked and sinful hearts; yet so long as they walk
sincerely according to the rules prescribed of God, there is no
such character upon them; especially as it stands related to the
words that immediately follow; to wit, "that it repented the Lord
that he made them."

These evil and wicked purposes then were in special the fruit of
their apostacy: for indeed, when men are once fallen from God,
they then, as the judgment of God upon them, are given up to all
unrighteousness. Again, apostatizing persons are counted abhorrers
of God (Zech 11:8). Yet persons in this condition will seek their
own justification, turning things upside down, traversing their
ways like the dromedaries; bearing us still in hand, that they
stand not guilty of sin, but that what they do is allowable, or
winked at of God. Besides, they say their hearts are still upright
with God, and that they have not forsaken the simplicity of his
way, of a wicked and ungodly design, with an hundred more the
like pretences; all which are condemned of God, and held by him
as abominable and vile (Jer 2:31-37).

And God saw, &c. They covered their shame from men, like the adulterous
woman in the Proverbs, and would speak with oily mouths, thereby
to cozen the world (Pro 30:20); but God knew their hearts, and
had revealed their sin to his servant Noah; he therefore in the
Spirit of God, as one alone, cried out against their wickedness.

Hence learn to judge of apostates, not by their words, nor pretences,
nor ungodly coverings, whereby they may seek to hide themselves
from the stroke of a convincing argument, but judge them by the
words of God; for however they think of themselves, or would be
accounted of others, God sees their wickedness is great.

"And that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only
evil continually." If they think they have not sinned; if they think
they promote religion; if they think to find out a medium to make
peace between the seed of the woman, and the wicked seed of Cain;
all is alike ungodly, they have forsaken the right way, they have
dissembled the known truth, they have rejected the word of the
Lord: And what wisdom or goodness is in them?

Ver. 6. "And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the
earth, and it grieved him at his heart."

Repentance is in us a change of the mind; but in God, a change of
his dispensations; for otherwise he repenteth not, neither can he;
because it standeth not with the perfection of his nature: In him
"is no variableness, neither shadow of turning" (James 1:17).

Wherefore, it is man, not God, that turns. When men therefore
reject the mercy and ways of God, they cast themselves under his
wrath and displeasure; which because it is executed according to
the nature of his justice, and the severity of his law, they miss
of the mercy promised before (Num 23:19). Which that we may know,
those shall one day feel that shall continue in final impenitency.
Therefore, God speaking to their capacity, he tells them, he hath
repented of doing them good. "The Lord repented that he had made
Saul king" (1 Sam 15:35). And yet this repentance was only a
change of the dispensation, which Saul by his wickedness had put
himself under; otherwise the strength, the eternity of Israel,
"will not lie nor repent" (v 29).

The sum is therefore, that men had now by their wickedness put
themselves under the justice and law of God; which justice by
reason of its perfection, could not endure they should abide on
the earth any longer; and therefore now, as a just reward of their
deed, they must be swept from the face thereof.

"And it grieved him at his heart." This is spoken to show, that
he did not feign, but was simple and sincere in his promise of
remission and forgiveness of sins, had they kept close to his word,
according as he had commanded. Wherefore God's heart went not with
them in their backsliding, but left them, and was offended with
them.

Ver. 7. "And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created,
from the face of the earth, both man, and beast, [or from man to
beast,] and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it
repenteth me that I have made them."

This may be either understood as a threatening, or a determination:
if as a threatening then it admitted of time for repentance; but
if it was spoken as a determination, then they had stood out the
day of grace, and had laid themselves under unavoidable judgment.
If it respected the first, then it was in order to the ministry
of Noah, or in order to the effecting the ends of its sending;
which were either to soften or harden, or bring to repentance, or
to leave them utterly and altogether inexcusable. But if it respected
the second, as it might, then it was pronounced as an effect of
God's displeasure, for their abuse of his patience, his minister,
and word. As it also was with Israel of old; "They mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there
was no remedy" (2 Chron 36:16).

"And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created." This
word created, is added, on purpose to show that the world is under
the power of his hand; for who can destroy, but he that can create?
Or who can save alive, when the maker of the world is set against
them? "There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy"
(James 4:12). And again, "Fear him which is able to destroy both
soul and body in hell" (Matt 10:28). In both which places power
to destroy is insinuated from his power and Godhead: As he saith
in another place, "All souls are mine;--the soul that sinneth, it
shall die" (Eze 18:4).

"Both man and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls," &c.
Thus it was at first the sin of a man brought a curse and judgment
upon other the creatures whom God had made: As Paul says, "The
whole creation groaneth" (Rom 8:22).

But again, This threatening upon the beasts, the fowls, and creeping
thing, might arise from a double consideration: First, To show,
that when God intends the destruction of man, he will also destroy
the means of his preservation (Josh 6:20). Or, secondly, To shew,
that when he is determined to execute his judgments, he will cut
off all that stands in his way (2 Chron 35:21). He could not destroy
the earth without a flood, and preserve the beast, &c., alive;
therefore he destroys them also.

"For it repenteth me that I have made them." This seems to fall
under the first consideration, to wit, That God repented that he
made the beasts and fowls; because now they were used to sustain
his implacable enemies.

Ver. 8. "But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD."

This word GRACE, must in special be observed; for grace is it which
delivereth from all deserved judgments and destruction.

Noah, by nature was no better than other men: therefore the reason
why he perished not with others, it was because he "found grace in
the eyes of the Lord." Ye are saved by grace (Eph 2:8). And thus
was Noah, as is evident, because he was saved by faith (Heb 11:7).
For faith respecteth not works, but grace: Ye are saved by grace
through faith. As Paul says again, "Therefore it is of faith that
it might be by grace," &c. (Rom 4:16). We must therefore, in our
deliverance from all the judgments of God, sing grace, grace, unto
it.

Ver. 9. "These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man,
and perfect in his generations; and Noah walked with God."

The Holy Ghost here makes a short digression from his progress, in
his relation of the wickedness of the world; and yet not impertinently;
for seeing Noah was the man that escaped the judgment, his escape
must be for some reason; which was, because God was gracious to
him, and because God had justified him. Besides Noah being now
made righteous, faithfully walketh with God.

"He was just and perfect in his generations." But why it is said,
Generations? It might be, because he was faithful to God and man,
having the armour of righteousness on the right hand, and on the
left. It is said in Isaiah, That Christ "made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death" (53:9). To import, That
they only have benefit by him to eternal life, that die by his
example, as well as live by his blood; for in his death was both
merit and example; and they are like to miss in the first, that
are not concerned in the second (Phil 8:16).

"Perfect in his generations." In his carriage, doctrines and life,
before both God and man. And thus ought every preacher to be; he
ought to do in the sight of God, what he commands to men; by this
means he saveth both himself, and them that hear him (1 Tim 4:16).

Besides, Noah was a man, as well as a saint, and in either sense
had a generation: to both of which grace made him faithful; and he
that shall not serve his generation as a man, will hardly serve
his generation as a Christian. But Noah was perfect in both, he
was "perfect in his generations."

"And Noah walked with God." This shews he was sincere in his work;
for a hypocrite may, as to outward shew, do as the saint of God:
but he doth it with respect to men, not God, and therefore he is
a hypocrite. To walk with God then, is not only to do the duty
commanded, but to do it as God requireth it; that is, to do it with
faith, and son-like fear, as in God's sight, "with singleness of
heart."

Ver. 10. "And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth."

These are the offspring of Noah, and by these was the earth
replenished after the flood, as will be further seen hereafter.

Ver. 11. "The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was
filled with violence."

He has now returned to the matter in hand before; to wit, the
causes of the flood.

"The earth also was corrupt." By earth, he may here mean, those
that are without the church: and if so, then by corrupt here, we
must understand, wicked after a most high manner; for albeit the
world and generation of Cain be always sinners before God, yet
the Lord cutteth not off the world in general, nor a nation in
particular, but because of the commission of eminent outrage and
wickedness. Thus it was with those of Sodom, a little before the
Lord with fire devoured them. "The men of Sodom [saith the text]
were wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly" (Gen 13:13).

Again: As by corrupt, we may understand, corrupt by way of eminency;
so again, they were corrupt incurably. This is evident, because
they were not brought off from sin by the ministry of Noah, the
only appointed means of their conversion.

Hence note, That when men are sinners exceedingly, and when the means
of grace appointed of God for their recovery, prove ineffectual,
then they are near some signal judgment (2 Chron 36). Thus
back-sliding Jerusalem, because she was wicked with an high hand
(Eze 24:13,14), and could not be cured by the ministry of the
prophets, therefore her sons must go forth of her into captivity,
and the city burned to the ground with fire (Jer 15:1-3).

"And the earth was filled with violence." First, they had violated
the law of God, in making and maintaining ungodly and wicked
communion; according to that of the prophet, "Her priests have
violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things." But how?
"They have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither
have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean"
(Eze 22:26).

They also perverted judgment between a man and his neighbour:
adhering to their own party, in disaffection to the religious. This
is supposed, because of the exceeding latitude of the expression,
"The earth was filled with violence"; that is, all manner of
violence, outrage and cruelty was committed by this sort of people.
This takes in that saying of Solomon, the oppression of the poor,
especially God's poor, is included, in a "violent perverting of
judgment and justice" (Eccl 5:8).

They also shewed violence to the lives of good men, as may be
gathered by the act of Lamech, one of the sons of Cain. In a word,
"The earth was filled with violence"; violence of every kind; lust
and wickedness was outrageous, there was a world of ungodliness
among these ungodly men.

Ver. 12. "And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was
corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth."

By these words therefore is confirmed the sense of the former
verse, "The earth was corrupt"; for God saw it was so: "The earth
was full of violence," for they had corrupted God's way.

"And God looked upon the earth." This shews us, That the Lord doth
not with haste, or in a rash inconsiderate way, pour his judgments
upon the world; but that with judgment and knowledge, the wickedness
first being certain, and of merit deserving the same. This is
seen in his way of dealing with Sodom. "And the Lord said, Because
the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is
very grievous, I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and
if not, I will know" (Gen 18:21).

"And, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way
upon the earth." It proved, as that of Sodom did, according to the
cry thereof; for "all flesh had corrupted his way." God's WAY,
by violating his law, and perverting of judgment, as was hinted
before. All flesh had corrupted it, therefore the evil needed not to
be long in searching out: As God saith by the prophet Jeremiah, "I
have not found it by diligent search, but upon all these" (2:34).
Here upon the whole earth, none exempted but righteous Noah.

Ver. 13. "And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come
before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and,
behold, I will destroy them with the earth."

"And God said unto Noah," or told Noah his purpose: The same way
he went with Abraham: "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which
I do?" (Gen 18:17). "Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he
revealeth his secrets unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7).

"The end of all flesh is come." The time or expiration of the world
is at hand. God speaks before he smites. Thus he did also by the
prophet Ezekiel, saying, "An end" is come, "the end is come": And
again, "An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee;
behold, it is come" (7:1-6).

"The end of all flesh is come before me." Sin and wickedness doth
not put an end to the ungodly before their own face, yet it brings
their end before the face of God. It is said of these very people,
"they knew not" of their destruction, "until" the day "the flood
came, and took them all away" (Matt 24:37-39). Indeed, the nature
of sin is to blind the mind, that the person concerned may neither
see mercy nor judgment; but God sees their end: "The end of all
flesh is come before me."

"The end of all flesh." By these words, the souls are left to, and
reserved for another judgment: Wherefore, though here we find the
flesh consumed; yet Peter saith, their spirits are still in prison,
even the souls that Christ once preached to in the days, and by the
ministry of Noah: Even the souls "which sometime were disobedient
when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the ark was a preparing," &c. (1 Peter 3:19,20).

Ver. 14. "Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make
in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch."

This is the fruits of the grace of God: He said before, That Noah
"found grace in the eyes of the Lord": Which grace appoints to him
the means of his preservation.

"Make THEE an ark." He saith not, Make one; or, Make one for me:
But, Make one; make one for thee: "Make THEE an ark of gopher
wood."

Noah therefore, from this word THEE, did gather, That God did intend
to preserve him from the judgment which he had appointed in this
his work: Therein lay his own profit and comfort; not a thought
which he had, not a blow that he struck, about the preparing the
ark, but he preached, as to others their ruin, to himself, his
safeguard and deliverance: He "prepared an ark, to the saving of
his house" (Heb 11:7).

This therefore must needs administer much peace and content to his
mind, while he preached to others their overthrow. As the prophet
saith, "The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect
of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. And my people
shall dwell in a peaceable habitation" (Isa 32:17,18). Thus did
Noah when he dwelt in the ark, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet
resting-places.

"Make thee an ark." The ark was a figure of several things. 1. Of
Christ, in whom the church is preserved from the wrath of God. 2.
It was a figure of the works of the faith of the godly: "By faith
he prepared an ark"; by which the followers of Christ are preserved
from the rage and tyranny of the world (for the rage of the water
was a type of that, as I shall shew you hereafter). So then Noah,
by preparing an ark, or by being bid so to do of God, was thereby
admonished, First, To live by the faith of Christ, of whom the
ark was a type: and hence it is said, that in preparing the ark,
he "became heir of the righteousness which is by faith"; because
he understood the mind of God therein, and throughout his figure
acted faith upon Christ. But, Secondly, His faith was not to be idle,
and therefore he was bid to work. This begat in him an obediential
fear of doing ought which God had forbidden: "By faith Noah, being
warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared
an ark, to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the
world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith"
(Heb 11:7).

"Rooms [nests] shalt thou make in the ark." To wit, for himself,
and the beasts, and birds of the field, &c. Implying, that in the
Lord Jesus there is room for Jews and Gentiles. Yea, forasmuch as
these rooms were prepared for beasts of every sort, and for fowls of
every wing: it informs us, that for all sorts, ranks and qualities
of men, there is preservation in Jesus Christ: "Compel them to
come in"; drive them (in a gospel sense as Noah did the beasts of
old into the ark), that my house may be full, "and yet there is
room" [27] (Luke 14:22,23).

"And thou shalt pitch it within and without with pitch." This was
to secure all from the flood, or to keep them that were in the ark
from perishing in the waters.

Ver. 15. "And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: the
length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it
fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits."

A vessel fit to swim upon the waters.

"And this is the fashion," &c. God's ordinances must be according
to God's order and appointment, not according to our fancies, "This
is the fashion," to wit, according to what is after expressed.

By these words therefore Noah was limited and bound up, as to a
direction from which he must not vary; according to that of the
angel to the prophet, "Son of man [saith he] behold with thine
eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that
I shall shew thee: for to the intent that I might shew them unto
thee, art thou brought hither" (Eze 40:4). As the Lord said also
to his servant Moses, "In all things that I have said unto you, be
circumspect" (Exo 23:13). And so again, about making the tabernacle
in the wilderness, which the apostle also takes special notice
of, saying, "See, saith he, that thou make all things according
to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount" (Heb 8:5).

Hence note, That God's command must be the rule whereby we order
all our actions, especially when we pretend to worship that is
divine and religious. If our works, orders, and observances, have
not this inscription upon them, "This is the fashion," or "This is
according to the pattern," such works and orders will profit us
nothing: neither have we any promise when all is done, it wanting
the order of God, that we should escape those judgments which those
shall assuredly escape, that have their eye in their work to the
"pattern" revealed in the word.[28]

Ver. 16. "A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt
thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in
the side thereof: with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou
make it."

I told you before, That the ark was a type of Christ, and also of
the works of the faith of the godly. And now he seems to bring in
more, and to make it a type of the church of Christ: as indeed the
prophet also does, when he calls the church, one afflicted, and
tossed with tempests; and compareth her troublers to the waters of
Noah, saying, "This is as the waters of Noah" (Isa 54:9).

Now as the ark was a type of the church, so according to the
description of this verse she hath three most excellent things
attending her. 1. Light. 2. A door. 3. Stories of a lower and higher
rank.

1. She hath a window for light, and that when she was to be tossed
upon the waters. Hence note, That the church of Christ wanteth not
light, no, not in the worst of times. This light is the Word and
Spirit of God which Christ hath given to them that obey him (John
17).

2. She hath a door. This door was a type of Christ; so was also
the door of the tabernacle. And hence it is that you read, That
Moses, when he went to talk with God, would stand to talk in the
door of the tabernacle; also that the cloudy pillar stood at the
door (Exo 33:9,10). "I [saith Christ] am the door": Again, "I am
the door of the sheep" (John 10). By this door then, entered all
that went into the ark, as by Christ all must enter that enter
aright into the church.

3. She had stories in her, of first, second, and third degree: To
shew that also in the church of Christ there are some higher than
some, both as to persons and states: 1. apostles; 2. evangelists;
3. pastors and teachers. And again, there are in the church degrees
of states, as also there are in heaven.

Ver. 17. "And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon
the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life from
under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die."

This is the reason of the former commandment, of making an ark:
But some time was yet to intervene: the flood was hereafter to
overflow the world: wherefore, from this it is that those words are
inserted, of things not seen as yet: And that the ark was a work,
or the fruit of Noah's faith: "by faith Noah, being warned of God
of things not seen as yet," &c. (Heb 11).

"And, behold, I, even I," &c. These words excuse Noah of treason
or rebellion, forasmuch as his preparation for himself, and his
warning and threatening the whole world with death and judgment
for their transgression, was solely grounded upon the word of God:
God bid him prepare, God said he would punish the world for their
iniquity.

Hence note, That a man is not to be counted an offender, how
contrary soever he lieth, either in doctrine or practice, to men,
&c. if both have the command of God, and are surely grounded upon
the words of his mouth. This made Jeremiah, though he preached,
That the city of Jerusalem should be burnt with fire, the king and
people should go into captivity; yet stand upon his own vindication
before his enemies, and plead his innocency against them that
persecuted him (Jer 26:10-15). Daniel also, though he did openly
break the king's decree, and refused to stoop to his idolatrous and
devilish demand; yet purged himself of both treason and sedition,
and justifies his act as innocent and harmless, even in the sight
of God. "My God [saith he] hath sent his angel, and hath shut the
lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him
innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I
done no hurt" (Dan 6:22).

Further, Paul also, although by his doctrine he did cry down the
ceremonies of the Jews, and the idolatry of the heathen emperor,
yet he quits himself of blame from either side: "Neither against
the law of the Jews, [saith he], neither against the temple, nor
yet against Caesar, have I offended anything at all" (Acts 25:8).
The reason is, because the words of God, how severely soever they
threaten sinners, and how sharply soever (the preacher keeping
within the bowels of the word) this doctrine be urged on the world,
if it destroy, it destroyeth but sin and impenitent sinners, even
as the waters of Noah must do.

This then affords us another note worth remarking, to wit, That what
God hath said in his word, how offensive soever it be to ungodly
men, THAT we that are Christians ought to observe: whether it
direct us to declare against others' enormities, or to provide
for ourselves against the judgment to come.

"And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood," &c. Hence note again,
Let us preach and practise well, and let God alone the execute his
judgments. It is said of Samuel, That not one of his words did fall
to the ground (1 Sam 3:19). He preached, and God, according to his
blessing or cursing, did either spare and forgive, or execute his
judgments.

"And, behold, I, even I." Note again, That when sinners have with
the utmost contempt slighted and despised the judgment threatened,
yet forasmuch as the execution thereof is in the hand of an omnipotent
majesty, it must fall with violence upon the head of the wicked.
"I, even I," therefore, were words of a strong encouragement to
Noah, and the godly with him; but black, and like claps of thunder
to the pestilent unbelieving world: as the prophet says, "He is
strong that executes his word": And again, "Not one of his judgments
fail."

"And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood." The flood was a type
of three things.

1. A type of the enemies of the church (Isa 54:9-14).

2. A type of the water baptism under the new testament (1 Peter
3:20,21).

3. A type of the last and general overthrow of the world by fire
and brimstone (2 Peter 3:6,7).

But here, as it simply respecteth the cause, which (as is afore
related) was the sin that before you read of; so it precisely was
a type of the last of these, and to that end put an end to the
world that then was. The world that then was, being overflowed
with water, perished, to signify, That the heavens and the earth
which are now, are reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment,
and perdition of ungodly men.

"I bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh,
wherein is the breath of life from under heaven: and every thing
that is in the earth shall die." By these latter words, as the
cause, so the extension of this curse is expressed; and that under
a threefold denotation.

1. Every thing that is in the earth.

2. All flesh wherein is the breath of life.

3. Every thing that is under heaven. So then, this deluge was
universal, and extended itself not only to those parts of the
world where Noah and that generation lived, which we find repeated
before, but even over the face of all the earth; and it took hold
of the life of every living thing that was either on all the
earth, or in the air, excepting only those in the ark, as will
the general judgment do: "And Noah only remained alive, and they
that were with him in the ark" (Gen 7:23).

Ver. 18. "But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt
come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons'
wives with thee."

"But with thee," &c. This concerns what was said before concerning
the universality of the flood: As he also said above, "But Noah
found grace in the eyes of the LORD." This Peter also notes, He
"saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing
in the flood upon the world of the ungodly" (1 Peter 2:5).

"With thee will I establish my covenant." My covenant of mercy,
or my promise to save thee when I drown the whole world for their
iniquity: And therefore he adds, "And thou shalt come into the
ark."

"I will establish." Making and establishing of promises are not
always the same: He made his promise to Abraham, he seconded it
with an oath unto Isaac, and he confirmed, or established it to
Jacob; for by him he multiplied the seed of Abraham as the stars
of heaven for multitude (Psa 105:8-10).

"With thee will I establish." Or, unto thee will I perform my
promise, "Thou shalt come into the ark."

Hence note again, That we ought to look upon signal and great
deliverances from sore and imminent dangers, to be confirmations
of the promise or covenant of God. Or thus, When God finds means
of deliverance, and instateth our souls in a special share of
that means, this we should take as a sign, That with us God hath
confirmed, or established, his covenant (Luke 1:68-78).

"Thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee."
Because in that family did now reside the whole of the visibility
of the church upon the earth; all the rest were lost, as Peter
also intimates, when he calleth Noah the eighth person, or one,
and the chief of the eight that made up the visible church, or
that maintained the purity of the worship of God upon the face of
the whole earth: As he explains it a little after: "For thee have
I seen righteous before me in this generation" (7:1).

Ver. 19. "And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort
shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they
shall be male and female."

By these words, Noah should seem to be, in this action, a figure
or semblance of Christ; who before the Lord shall rain fire and
brimstone from heaven, shall gather into his ark, the church, of
all kindreds, and tongues, and people, and nations (Luke 13:29;
14:21). Even as Noah was to gather of all, of everything, of all
flesh, of every sort, with him into the ark.

"Two of every sort." This two, in special, respecteth the unclean
(7:2), which were a type of the Gentiles, and so further confirms
the point.

They shall be male and female. He would not make a full end, he
would in judgment remember mercy (Acts 10:11,12,17,28).

Ver. 20. "Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their
kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind: two of
every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive."

"Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind." This,
still respecting the antitype, may shew us also, how that God,
for proof of the prophecy of the spreading of the gospel, doth
not only tell us, that the Gentiles were gathered into his ark,
but as here the beasts and birds, according to their kind, are
specified: so the Gentiles are also denominated according to their
several countries, Galatians, Corinthians, Ephesians, Colossians,
Thessalonians, Bereans, &c., these, after their country and nation,
were gathered unto Jesus to be preserved from the flood of wrath
that at last shall fall from God who dwells in heaven, to the
burning up of the sinner and ungodly.

"Two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive." If
the emphasis lieth in Come, as I am apt to think, and as the eighth
verse of the next chapter fairly allows me to judge; then we must
observe still, That Noah was not only first in the ark, as our
Lord and Christ is the first from the dead; but that the cattle,
the fowls, and the creeping things, did come to him into the
ark, by a special instinct from heaven of the fruits of a divine
election.[29] Noah therefore, as a man, did not make choice which
of every kind; but he went first into the ark, and then of clean
beasts by sevens, and of unclean beasts by twos, went in unto Noah
into the ark, as the Lord commanded Noah.

And thus it is in the antitype: "Unto thee shall all flesh come,"
saith the prophet (Psa 65:2). And again, "To him shall the gathering
of the people be" (Gen 49:10). But how? Why, by an instinct from
heaven, the fruit of a divine election: "All that the Father giveth
me shall come to me; but no man can come to me [saith Christ]
except the Father which hath sent me draw him" (John 6:37,44).
The beasts therefore which came into the ark, were neither chosen
by men, neither came they in by any instinct of nature which was
common to them all, but as being by a divine hand singled out
and guided thither, so they entered in: the rest were left to the
fury of the flood. Like to this also is the antitype, sinners come
not to Jesus by any work or choice of flesh and blood, nor yet by
any instinct of nature that is common to all the world; but they
come, as being by a divine hand singled out from others; and as
guided of the Father, so they come to Christ into the ark: The
rest are left to the fury of the wrath of God, which, in the day
of judgment, shall swallow them up for ever.

"They shall come unto thee to keep them alive." Indeed, they lived
not for their own sakes, they being not better than them that
perished; but "they shall come unto thee to save them": for, for
the sake of Noah they were preserved, when many millions were
drowned in the waters. Bring this also to the antitype, and you find
them look like one another: for the reason why some are saved from
the wrath to come, it is not for that they are better in themselves,
for both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin: But it is Christ that
saveth by his righteousness, as Noah saved the beasts and fowls,
&c. Let us therefore, as the beasts did, go to Jesus Christ, that
he may keep us alive from perishing in the day of judgment.

Ver. 21. "And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and
thou shalt gather it to thee, and it shall be for food for thee,
and for them."

This therefore was for the preservation of the life of those that
were in the ark; by which action there is, as in the former, inclosed
a gospel-mystery.

"Take thou unto thee of all food." This food was not to be at the
will and dispose of unruly beasts; but Noah was, as the lord of all
that was in the ark, to take it into his own custody: and therefore
he doubleth the command, "Take it unto thee"; Gather it unto thee;
to wit, to dispose of after thy discretion and faithfulness. In
this therefore he was a type of Christ, whom God hath set as Lord
and King in the church, and "to feed his flock as a shepherd"; for
the "bread of God" is in the hand of Christ, for him to communicate
unto his spouses, saints, and children; as Joseph did to Egypt,
according to the power committed to him, and trust reposed in
him. And hence it is said, as concerning the bread that endureth
to everlasting life, "the Son of man shall give it you; for Him
hath God the Father sealed," or appointed thereunto (John 6:27):
and therefore, that he giveth, we receive, and no more of the
bread of God: That thou givest them, they gather: thou openest
thine hand, they are filled with good (Psa 104:28).

"Take unto thee all food." That is, to be eaten by man and beast;
the fowl also, and the creeping thing. This still followed, and
brought in to the gospel, it shews us, that, even then, when the
church is driven up into a hole, and tossed upon the waves of the
rage and fury of the world, as the ark was upon the face of the
waters, that even then her Noah hath all food for her, or food of
all sorts for her support and refreshment: "Bread shall be given
him; his waters shall be sure" (Isa 33:16).

"Take unto thee." How blessedly was this answered, when the Lion
of the tribe of Judah took the book out of the hand of him that
sat upon the throne (Rev 5:7); for in the book is contained the
words of everlasting life; and the words of God are the food of
his church, which this Noah hath received to nourish them withal:
Man "liveth not by bread only," but by every word that proceedeth
out of the mouth of the Lord, doth man live (Matt 4:4; Deu 8:3).

"And it shall be for food for thee, and for them." That is, each
according to their kind. The same is true also under our present
consideration; Christ is the shepherd, we are the sheep, yet He
feedeth with us in the ark: "I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me" (Rev 3:20). Again, here Christ transcends
this action of Noah; for he was to have his food of his own, but
Christ feedeth on the same with us, even on the words of God: Yet
herein again we differ; he feedeth as a Lord, we as servants; he as
a Saviour, we as the saved; but in general, respecting the words
of God, we feed all but of one dish, but at one table; the bread
therefore that he hath provided, gathered and taken to him, it was
food for him, as well as for us.

Ver. 22. "Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him,
so did he."

These words therefore present us with a description of the sincerity
and simplicity of the faith of Noah; who received the word at the
mouth of God; not to hear only, but to do and live in the same.

"Thus did Noah." As it is also said of his servant Moses, "As the
Lord commanded Moses, so did he": As the Lord commanded Moses,
so did he, Yea, to shew us how pleasant a thing the Holy Ghost
accounteth this holy obedience of faith, he is not weary with
repeating, and repeating again not less than eight times in one
chapter, the punctuality of Moses's conformity with the word of
God, in this manner, "Thus did Moses"; "according to all that the
Lord commanded Moses, so did he" (Exo 40:16,19,21,23,25,27,29,32).

"Thus did Noah," This note therefore is, as it were, a character
or mark by which the Lord's people are known from the world: They
have special regard to the word. "All his saints are in thy hand:
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words"
(Deu 33:3). As Christ said, "I have given them thy words and they
have received them" (John 17:5,6): Yea, "and they have kept thy
word."

"Thus did Noah." Let this then be the discriminating character of
the saints from the men of this world. It was so in the days of
Noah, when all the world went a whoring from their God, and said,
"We desire not the knowledge of thy ways" (Job 21:14). Then Noah
kept the words of God. "Thus did Noah; according to all that God
commanded him, so did he." CHAPTER VII.

Ver. 1. "And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house
into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this
generation."

The ark being now prepared, and the day of God's patience come
to an end, he now is resolved to execute his threatening upon the
world of ungodly men; but withal, in the first place, to secure
his saints, and them that have feared his name. In this therefore
we have a semblance of the last judgment, and how God will dispose
of his friends and enemies.

"Come thou into the ark." God, I say, will take care of, and
safely provide for us that have feared him, when he most eminently
entereth into judgment with the world: As he also saith by Isaiah
the prophet, "Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and
shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little
moment, until the indignation be over-past" (26:20). He shall send
forth his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to another.

"Come thou and all thy house." Not an hoof must be left behind;
God will not lose the very dust of his people: Of all that thou
hast given me have I lost nothing, but will raise it up at the
last day (John 6:39). God therefore was careful not only of Noah,
but of all that were in his house; because they were all of his
visible church, they must therefore be preserved from the rage
and fury of the deluge. "Gather my saints together unto me; [saith
he] those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice" (Psa
50:5).

"For thee have I seen righteous before me." This is not to be
understood as the meritorious cause, but as the characteristical
note that distinguisheth them that are gods, from others that are
subjects of his wrath and displeasure: wherefore, those that at
this time perished, bear the badge of ungodliness, as that which
made them obnoxious to this overflowing judgment: As also we have
it in the book of Job, "Hast thou [saith Eliphaz] marked the old
way which wicked men have trodden? Which were cut down out of
time, whose foundation was overflown with a flood" (Job 22:15,16).

Righteousness therefore, is the distinguishing character whereby
the good are known from the bad. Thus it was in Ezekiel's time:
"Set a mark [saith God] upon the foreheads of the men that sigh
and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst
of the city" (Eze 9:4). Which mark was to distinguish them from
those that were profane, and that for their wickedness were to be
destroyed by the ministers of God's justice.

"For thee have I seen righteous before me." These words, before
me, are inserted on purpose to shew us, that Noah was no feigned
worshipper, but one who did all things in the sight of God.
Indeed, there are two things which are of absolute necessity for
the obtaining of this approbation of God. 1. All things must be
done as to manner according to the word. 2. All things must be
done as to the matter of them also according to the word. Both
which were found in Noah's performances; and therefore he is said
to be perfect in his generations, and that he walked with God.
Thus it was also with Zacharias and Elizabeth, "they were both
righteous before God"; that is, sincere and unfeigned in their
obedience (Luke 1:6).

"Righteous before me in this generation." By this we see, righteousness,
or the truth of God's worship in the world, was now come to a low
ebb; the devil, and the children of Cain, had bewitched the church
of God, and brought the professors thereof so off from the truth
of his way, that had they got Noah also, the church had been quite
extinct, and gone: wherefore, it now was time for God to work, and
to cherish what was left, even by sending a besom of destruction
upon all the face of the earth, to sweep away all the workers of
iniquity.

Ver. 2, 3. "Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens,
the male and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two,
the male and his female.--Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the
male and his female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the
earth."

Something hath been said to this already; only this I will add
further, That by this commandment of God, both Noah, and all that
were with him, were pre-admonished to look to their hearts; that
they continued unfeigned before him. For if God would save unclean
beasts, and fowls, from the present and terrible destruction; why
also might not some of them, though they partook of this temporal
deliverance, be still reputed as unclean in his sight? As indeed
it came to pass; for a cursed Ham was there. Wherefore, read
not lightly the commands of God, there may be both doctrine and
exhortation; both item,[30] as well as an obligation to a duty
containd therein. Circumcision was a duty incumbent as to the
letter of the commandment; but there was also doctrine in it, as to
a more high and spiritual teaching than the letter simply imported.

Note then from hence, That when you read that unclean beasts
and unclean birds, may be in the ark of Noah: That unclean men,
and unclean women, may be in the church of God: "One of you is a
devil," was an admonition to all the rest: Let this also of the
beasts unclean be an admonition to you.

Ver. 4. "For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the
earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that
I have made, will I destroy, [or, blot out] from off the face of
the earth."

Now the judgment is at the door; it is time to make haste, and
pack into the ark. God doth not love to have his people have much
vacancy from employment while they are in this world. Idle times
are dangerous; David found it so in the business of Uriah's wife.
Wherefore Noah having finished the ark, he hath another work to do,
even to get himself, with his family and household, fitly settled
in the vessel that was to save him from the deluge, and that at
his peril in seven days' time.

"For yet seven days, and I will bring a flood." Note again, That it
hath been the way of God, even when he doth execute the severest
judgments, to tell it in the ears of some of his saints sometime
before he doth execute the same: Yea, it seems to me, that it will
be so even in the great day of God Almighty; for I read, that before
the bridegroom came, thee was a cry made, "Behold the bridegroom
cometh!" (Matt 25:6). Which cry doth not seem to me, to be the
ordinary cry of the ministers of the gospel, but a cry that was
effected by some sudden and marvellous awakening, the product of
some new and extraordinary revelation. That also seems to look
like some fore-word to the church, "Then shall appear the sign of
the Son of man in heaven" (Matt 24:30): Some strange and unusual
revelation of that notable day to be near, which in other ages was
not made known to the world; upon which sign he presently appears.
Now whether this sign will be the appearing of the angels first;
or whether the opening of the heavens, or the voice of the arch-angel,
and the trump of God, or what, I shall not here presume to determine;
but a fore-word there is like to be, yet so immediately followed
with the personal presence of Christ, that they who had not grace
before, shall not have time nor means to get it then: And while
they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready
went in with him, and the door was shut (Matt 25).

"And I will cause it to rain forty days and forty nights." This
length of time doth fore-pronounce the completing of the judgment:
As who should say, I will cause it to rain until I have blotted
out all the creatures, both of men, beasts, and fowls: and so the
after-words import; "And every living substance that I have made,
will I destroy from off the face of the earth."

Ver. 5. "And Noah did according to all that the Lord commanded
him."

This note, as already I have said, doth denote him to be a righteous
man; one that might with honour to his God, escape the judgment
now to be executed: wherefore, the reiterating of this character is
much for the vindicating of God's justice, and for the justification
of his overthrowing the world of ungodly sinners.

But again, these words seem to respect in special, what Noah did
in the last seven days, in order to the commandment laid before
him in the three first verses of this chapter; and so they signify
his faithfulness to the word, and his observance of the law of his
God, even to the day that the rain began to fall upon the earth.
And therefore they preach unto us, not only that he began well,
but that he continued in godly and unfeigned perseverance; which
when perfected, is the most effectual proof, that what before
he did, he did with uprightness of heart, and therefore now must
escape the judgment. As it is said in the gospel of Matthew, "He
that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved" (Matt
24:13). Ver. 6. "And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood
of waters was upon the earth."

Four hundred and fourscore of which the world had leisure to study
the prophecy that God gave of him by the mouth of his father Lamech
(Gen 5:29); the other hundred and twenty he spent in a more open
testifying, both by word, and his preparing the ark, that God
would one day overtake them with judgment; yet to the day that
the flood came, the world was ignorant thereof (Matt 24:38,39).
(Astonishing is the fruits of sin:) So it came to pass, that in
the six hundredth year of Noah's life, which was the one thousand
six hundred fifty sixth year of the world's age, the flood of
waters were upon the earth, to the utter destruction of all that
was found upon the face thereof, Noah only being left alive, and
they that were with him in the ark.

Ver. 7. "And Noah went in, and his sons,[31] and his wife, and his
sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the
flood."

They had hardly done their work in the world, by that it began to
rain, by that the first drops of the judgment appeared. They went
into the ark, says the text, because of the waters of the flood.
This should teach Christians diligence, lest they be called for
by God's dispensations, either of death or judgment, before they
have served completely their generations, by the will of God. Noah
had done it, but it seems he had but done it; his work was ended
just as the judgment came: "Be ye also ready; for in such an hour
as ye think not the Son of man cometh" (Matt 24:44).

Ver. 8, 9. "Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and
of fowls, and of everything that creepeth upon the earth, there
went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the
female, as God had commanded Noah."

By these words it seems (as I also touched before) that the beasts,
and fowls, both clean and unclean, did come in to Noah into the
ark; not by Noah's choice, nor by any instinct that was common to
all, but by an instinct from above, which so had determined the life
and death of these creatures, even to a very sparrow; for not one
of them doth fall to the ground without the providence of our
heavenly Father.

"They went in unto Noah." And let no man deride, for that I say,
By an instinct from above; for God hath not only wrought wonders
in men, but even in the beasts, and fowls of the air; to the
making of them act both above and against their own nature. How
did Baalam's ass speak! (Num 22:28-30). And the cows that drew
the ark, have it right to the place which God had appointed, not
regarding their sucking calves! (1 Sam 6:10-14). Yea, how did
those ravenous creatures, the ravens, bring the prophet bread and
flesh twice a day, but by immediate instinct from heaven? (1 Kings
17:6). Even by the same did these go in to Noah, into the ark.

Ver. 10. "And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of
the flood were upon the earth."

Just as the Lord had denounced before: Look therefore, what God
hath said, shall assuredly come to pass, whether it be believed,
or counted an idle tale. The confirmation therefore of what God
hath spoken, depended not upon the credence of man, because it
came not by the will of man: "He hath said it, and shall he not
make it good?" It will therefore assuredly come to pass, whatever
God hath spoken, be it to save his Noahs, or be it to drown his
enemies; and the reason is, Because to do otherwise, is inconsistent
with his nature. He is faithful, holy and true, and cannot deny
himself, that is, the word which he hath spoken.

Ver. 11. "In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second
month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all
the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows [or
flood-gates] of heaven were opened."

As to the month, and the day of the month I have but little to say:
though doubtless, had not there been something worthy of knowing
therein, it would not so punctually have been left upon record;
for I dare not say this scribe wrote this in vain, or that it was
needless thus to punctilio it; a mystery is in it, but my darkness
sees it not; I must speak according to the proportion of faith.

"The same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up."
By these words, it seems that it did not only rain from heaven,
but also the springs and fountains were opened; which together
with the great rain of his strength, did overflow the world the
sooner.

This great deep, in mine opinion, was also a type of the bottomless
pit, that mouth and gulf of hell, which at the day of judgment
shall gape upon the world of ungodly men, to swallow them up from
the face of the earth, and to carry them away from the face and
presence of God.

"And the windows [or flood-gates] of heaven were opened." That
is, that the water might descend without measure or order, even in
its own natural force, with violence upon the head of the wicked.
It came as water out of his buckets upon them, judgment without
mercy (Num 24:7).

This opening of the flood-gates of heaven, was a type of the way
that shall be made for the justice of God upon ungodly men, when
Christ hath laid aside his mediatorship; for he indeed is the sluice
that stoppeth this justice of God from its dealing according to
its infinite power and severity with men. He stands, like Moses,
and, as it were, holdeth the hands of God. Oh! but when he shall
be taken away! When he shall have finished his mediatory work: then
will the flood-gates of heaven be opened, and then will the justice
and holiness of God deal with men without stint or diminution,
even till it hath filled the vessels of wrath with vengeance till
they run over. "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God."

Ver. 12. "And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty
nights."

That is, It rained so long without stop or sting (v 4).

Ver. 13. "In the self same day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and
Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives
of his sons with them, into the ark."

This therefore more fully approveth of what I said before; to
wit, That they had hardly done their work in the world, by that
it began to rain; but so soon as they had done, the flood was upon
the earth. Much like this is that of Lot; it was not to rain fire
and brimstone upon Sodom, till he was got to Zoar: But when Lot
was entered, but just entered, "Then the Lord rained upon Sodom,
and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the LORD out of heaven"
(Gen 19:21-24).

Hence note, That the reason why God doth forbear to destroy the
world for the wickedness of them that dwell therein, it is for
the sake of the elect; because his work upon them is not fully
perfected. "The Lord is not slack concerning his promise" (2 Peter
3:9); no, nor as concerning his threatening neither,--but is
long-suffering to us-ward who are the elect; not willing that any
of us should perish: But when Christ, head and members, are complete
in all things, let the world look for patience and forbearance no
longer; for in that self same day the trump of God will sound, and
the Lord descend with a shout from heaven, to execute his anger
with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire. Behold, he is now
"ready to judge the quick and the dead!" (1 Peter 4:5) "ready to be
revealed in the last time!" (1 Peter 1:5). The judge also stands at
the door (James 5:9); it is but opening therefore, and his hand is
upon you, which most assuredly he will do when his body is full
and complete.

Observe again, that providence sometimes so ordereth it, that as
touching the command of the Lord, necessity is as it were the great
wheel that brings men into the performances of them, as here the
flood drove them into the ark; as he said above, they went in
because of the waters of the flood: So concerning the ordinance
of unleavened bread, the first institution of that law, was as it
were accompanied with an unavoidable necessity, it was unleavened,
saith the text, "because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could
not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual"
(Exo 12:39).

It will be thus also at the day of judgment: Israel will be sufficiently
wary of this world, they will even as it were unexpressibly groan
to be taken up from hence; wherefore the Lord will come, as making
use of the weariness and groaning of his people, and will take
them up into his chambers of rest, and will wipe away all tears
from their eyes, as here Noah and his sons, &c. did enter into
the ark.

Ver. 14. "They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle
after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the
earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of
every sort" or wing.

Without doubt this careful repetition is not without a cause, and
have also in the bowels of it some comfortable doctrine for the
church of God; every beast, all cattle, every creeping thing that
creepeth; every fowl and bird of every wing.

Fist this sheweth, that God hath respect to the fulfilling of his
word in the midst of all his zeal and anger against sin (Gen 19).
He doth not as we, being angry, run headlong upon the offenders,
but if there be but three in a kingdom, or one in four cities, he
will have respect to them (Eze 14:19,20).

Secondly, It sheweth that, how inconsiderable soever the persons
are, that are within the compass, and care of the love and mercy
of God, that inconsiderableness shall not be a let to their safety
and preservation: Yea, though they are but as these creeping things,
that creep upon the earth, or as the saying is, but as a flea, a
dead dog, or a grasshopper, or one of the least of the grains of
wheat, not one of them, nay, not a hair of the head of them shall
fall to the ground and perish.

Ver. 15, 16. "And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two
of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life. And they that went
in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded
him: and the Lord shut him in."

The Holy Ghost in this relation is wonderfully punctual and exact:
every beast, all cattle, every creeping thing, every fowl, and every
bird, after their kind went in; and saith he again, they that went
in, went in two and two; as if there had been an intelligence among
these irrational creatures, that the flood was shortly to be upon
the earth. Indeed, many among the sensitives have strange instincts,
as appendixes to their nature, by which they do, and leave to do,
to the astonishment of them that have reason: But that any instinct
in nature should put them upon afore providing of shelter from
the flood, by going into the ark, (a place to secure them, rather
than to save them, had not the occasion and command of God been
otherwise) it cannot be once with reason imagined. Wherefore, as
their going into the ark, so their going in two by two, and that
too male and female, plainly declares that their motion was ordered
and governed by heaven, themselves being utterly ignorant thereof.

"And they that went in went in male and female of all flesh, [both
man and beast] and the Lord shut him in," that is Noah; and those
that were with him.

These latter words are of great importance, and do shew us the
distinguishing grace of God, for by his thus shutting the door of the
ark, he not only confirmed his mercy to Noah, but also discovered
the bounds and limits thereof. As who should say, Now Noah you
have your full tale, just thus many I will save from the flood: and
with that he shut the door leaving all other, both man and beast,
&c. to the fury of the waters. God therefore by this act hath shewed
how it will go in the day of judgment with men. Those that (like
those beasts, and birds, and creeping things) shall come to Christ,
into his ark, before it rain fire and brimstone from heaven, those
will God shut up in the ark, and they shall live in that day; but
those that shall then be found in the world strangers to Jesus
Christ, those will God shut out: "They that were ready went in with
him to the marriage: and the door was shut" (Matt 25:10).

And observe, it is not said, that Noah shut the door, but the Lord
shut him in: If God shuts in or out, who can alter it? I shut, and
no man openeth (Rev 3:7). Doubtless before the flood had carried
off the ark, others besides would with gladness have had there a
lodging room, though no better than a dog-kennel; but now it was
too late, the Lord had shut the door. Besides, had there been now
in the heart of Noah, bowels or compassion to those without the
ark, or had he had desire to have received them to him, all had
been worth nothing, the Lord had shut him in. This signifying,
that at the day of judgment, neither the bowels of Jesus Christ,
neither the misery that damned men shall be in, will anything at
all avail with God to save one sinner more, "the door is shut."

Where you read therefore both in Matthew and Luke of the shutting
of the door, understand that by such expressions Christ alludeth
to the door in Noah's ark, which door was open while Noah and his
attendants were entering into the ark, but they being got in, the
Lord shut the door. Then they that stood without and knocked, did
weep, and knock, and ask too late. As Christ saith, "When once
the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door,
and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying,
Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I
know you not whence ye are: Then shall ye begin to say, We have
eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our
streets, [as Noah did of old]. But he shall say, I tell you, I know
you not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see
Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom
of God, and you yourselves thrust out" (Luke 13:25-28).

Ver. 17. "And the flood was forty days upon the earth, and the
waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above
the earth."

While the ark rested, and abode in his place, no doubt but the
ears of Noah were filled with doleful cries from the wretched and
miserable people, whom God had shut without the ark, one while
crying, another while knocking, according to what but now was
related; which for ought I know might be many of the forty days,
but when the waters much increased, and lift up the ark above the
earth, this miserable company were soon shaken off.[32]

It will be thus also in the day of judgment; at the beginning of
that day the ears of the godly will sufficiently be filled with
the cries and tears of the damned and miserable world; but when
the ark shall be taken up, that is, when the godly shall ascend
into the clouds, and so go hence with Jesus, they will soon lose
this company, and be out of the hearing of their lamentable dolours.

"And the waters increased." God's judgments have no ears to receive
the cries, nor heart to pity the miseries of the damned. They cry,
it rains; they increase their cries, and the Lord does increase his
judgment. "And it came to pass, that as he cried, and they would
not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, saith the Lord of
hosts" (Zech 7:13).

Again, As the waters were a type of the wrath of God that in the
day of judgment shall fall upon ungodly men: So they were also a
type of those afflictions and persecutions that attend the church;
for that very water that did drown the ungodly, that did also
toss and tumble the ark about; wherefore by the increase of the
waters, we may also understand, how mighty and numerous sometimes
the afflictions and afflictors of the godly be: As David said,
"Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? many are they that
rise up against me" (Psa 3:1).

"And the waters increased, and bare up the ark." The higher the
rage and tyranny of this world goeth against the church of God,
the higher is the ark lifted up towards heaven, the most proud
wave lifts it highest: The church is also by persecution more
purged and purified from earthly and carnal delights; therefore
it is added, "the waters bare up the ark, and it was lift up above
the earth."

Ver. 18. "And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly
upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters."[33]

These words are still to be considered under the former double
consideration, to wit, both, as they present us with God's wrath
at the last judgment, and as they present us with a sign of the
rage and malice of ungodly men.

"And the waters prevailed"; that is, over all ungodly sinners;
though they were mighty, and stout, and cared for none, yet the
waters prevailed against them, as the fire and brimstone will do
over all the world at the day and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Wherefore, well may it be said to all impenitent sinners, "Can thy
heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, in the days that I shall
deal with thee" (Eze 22:14), saith the Lord God? Oh they cannot,
the waters of the wrath of God will prevail against, and increase
upon them, until they have utterly swallowed them up.

"And the waters prevailed." Take it now as a type of the nature
of persecution, and then it sheweth, that as the waters here did
swallow up all but the ark, so when persecution is mighty in the
world, it prevaileth to swallow up all but the church; for none
else can aright withstand or oppose their wickedness. It is said,
when the beast had power to work, "the whole world wondered after
the beast" (Rev 13:3), and all men who were not sealed, and that
had not the mark of God in their foreheads, fell in with the
worship of the beast; as it is said, "And all that dwell upon the
earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book
of life of the Lamb" &c. (v 8), So then it might well be said,
"The waters prevailed and increased."

"And the ark went upon the face of the waters." It is said that
in the beginning the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters, and here that the ark went upon the face of them. Indeed
the Spirit of God moveth, and the church, as God, walketh in
strange and unthought of stations. It is said, that God hath "a
way in the whirlwind, and in the storm" (Nahum 1:3). So he hath
upon the very face of the persecution of the day, but none but
the church can follow him here; it is the ark that can follow him
upon the face of the waters. Deep things are seen by them that are
upon the waters: "They that go down to the sea in ships, that do
business in great waters; They see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep" (Psa 107:23,24). Indeed it oft falls out,
that the church seeth more of God in affliction, than when she is
at rest and ease; when she is tumbled to and fro in the waters,
then she sees the works of God, and his wonders in the deep.

And this makes persecution so pleasant a thing, this makes the ark
go upon the face of the waters, she seeth more in this her state,
than in all the treasures of Egypt (Heb 11:24,25).

Ver. 19. "And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and
all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered."

This second repetition of the prevailing of the waters, doth also
call for a second consideration.

1. It shews us, that all hope that any ungodly man might have at
the beginning of the flood to escape the rage thereof, was now
swallowed up in death. Indeed it is natural to the creatures, when
floods and inundations are upon the earth, to repair to the high
places, as they only that are left for preservation of life; where
life may be also continued if the waters do not overflow them: but
when it comes to pass as here we read, that all the hills under
the heavens are covered: then life takes its farewell, and is gone
from the world, as was the effect of the waters of Noah.

The hills therefore were types of the hope of the hypocrite, upon
which they clamber till their heads do touch the clouds, thinking
thereby to escape the judgment of God; but "though they hide
themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out
thence," saith God (Amos 9:2,3). The flood of his wrath will come
thither, even over the tops of all the hills. So that safety is
only in the ark with Noah, in the church with Christ, all other
places must be drowned with the flood.

2. We may also understand by this verse, how God in a time
of persecution will cut off the carnal confidence of his people.
We are apt to place our hope somewhere else than in God, when
persecution ariseth because of the word. We hope that such a man,
or that such outward means may prevent our being swept away with
this flood. But because this confidence is not after God, but
tendeth to weaken our stedfast dependence on him; therefore this
flood shall cover all our hills, not one shall be found for us under
the whole heaven (Jer 2:36,37). When the king of Babylon came up
against Jerusalem to war, then Israel, instead of trusting in
God, put their confidence in the king of Egypt, but he also was
swallowed up by this flood, that Israel might be ashamed of such
confidence; and this at last they confessed. "As for us, [said
they,] our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our watching,
we have watched for a nation that could not save us" (Lam 4:17).

It was requisite therefore that the hills should be covered, that
Noah might not have confidence in them; but surely this dispensation
of God was an heart-shaking providence to Noah, and they that were
with him; for here indeed was his faith tried, there was no hill
left in all the world; now were his carnal helpers gone, there
was none shut up or left: Now therefore, if they could rejoice,
it must be only in the power of God. As David said, "Shall I lift
up mine yes to the hills? whence should my help come?" So the
margin: "My help cometh from the Lord that made heaven and earth"
(Psa 121:1,2).

Ver. 20. "Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the
mountains were covered." The height of Goliath was but six cubits
and a span (1 Sam 17:4), neither was Og's bedstead any more than
nine (Deu 3:11). Wherefore this flood prevailed far the highest of
those mighty ones: even fifteen cubits above the highest mountains.

Ver. 21, 22, 23. "And all flesh died that moved upon the earth,
both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping
thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man: All in whose
nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land,
died. And every living substance was destroyed, which was upon the
face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things,
and the fowls of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth,
and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the
ark."

In these words you have the effects of the flood, which was punctually
according to the judgment threatened. But observe, I pray you,
how the Holy Ghost, by repeating, doth amplify the matter. "All
flesh," "All in whose nostrils was the breath of life"; "All that
was in the dry land," "every living substance," "every man"; and
they were destroyed from off the earth: By which manner of language
doubtless there is insinuated a threatening to them who should
afterward live ungodly. And indeed the Holy Ghost affirmeth, that
these judgments, with that of Sodom, are but examples set forth
before our eyes, to shew us that such sins, such punishment. "Making
them an ensample, saith Peter, unto those that after should live
ungodly" (2 Peter 2:6). Nay, Jude saith, they are "set forth"
in their overthrow, for that very purpose (v 7). Wherefore this
careful repeating of this judgment of God, doth carry threatening
in it, assuredly foreshewing the doom and downfall of those that
shall continue to tread their steps.

Yea, mind how Peter hath it: For if God "spared not the old
world," &c. (2 Peter 2:5). Secretly intimating, that those that
then lived, being the first of his workmanship, and far surpassing
in magnificence, if he would have spared, he would have spared
them; but seeing he so dreadfully swept them away, let no man be
so bold to presume that wickedness shall now deliver him that is
given to it.

"And Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the
ark." Noah was that man of God that had set himself against a world
of ungodly men. The man that had hazarded life and limb for the
word of God committed to him; he "only remained alive," &c. Hence
note, That he was the man that outlived the world, that would for
God venture life against all the world. Wherefore the saying in
the gospel is true, He that will lose his life for my sake, shall
save it unto life eternal. Thus did Noah, and passed the end,
and went over the bounds, that God had appointed for every living
thing. Behold! he was a man in both worlds, yea, the world then to
come was given him for a possession.

"And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days."
About the same time the scorpions mentioned of John, had power to
hurt the earth (Rev 9:10). Wherefore, the thus prevailing of the
water, might be a type of our persecution now in the New Testament
days. All which time doubtless Noah was sufficiently tried, while
the waves of the water had no pity for him.

CHAPTER VIII.

Ver. 1. "And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all
the cattle that was with him in the ark; and God made a wind to
pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged."

Moses having thus related the judgment of the waters, as they
respected the drowning of the world, and so typed forth the last
judgment: he now returneth to speak of them more largely, as they
were a type of the persecution and afflictions of the church, and
so sheweth how God delivered Noah from the merciless violence of
the waves thereof.

"And God remembered Noah." This word remembered is usual in scripture;
both when God is about to deliver his people out of affliction,
and to grant them the petition which they ask of him. It is said,
"God remembered Abraham; and sent Lot out of Sodom" (Gen 19:29);
that he remembered Rachel, and hearkened to her (30:22); that he
also remembered his covenant with Abraham, when he went to bring
Israel out of their bondage (Exo 2:24).

Hence note, that Noah was not both in an afflicted and a praying
condition; afflicted with the dread of the waters, and prayed for
their asswaging. It is a question accompanied with astonishment,
How the ark being of no bigger an hull or bulk should contain so
many creatures, with sustenance for them? And verily, I think that
Noah himself was put to it, to believe and wait for so long a time.
But God remembered him, and also the beasts, and every living
thing that was with him, and began to put an end to these mighty
afflictions, by causing the waters to asswage.

"And God made a wind to pass over the earth." The waters being
here a type of persecutors and persecution: this wind was a type
of the breath of the Lord's mouth, by which he is said to slay
the wicked. "He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth,
and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked" (Isa
11:4). It was a wind also that blew away the locusts of Egypt (Exo
10:19), which locusts were a type of our graceless clergy, that
have covered the ground of our land.[34] Again the kingdom of
Babel was to be destroyed by a destroying wind, which the Lord
would send against her (Jer 51:1,2), which Paul expounds to be
by the breath of the Lord's mouth, and by the brightness of his
coming. This wind therefore, as I said, was a type of the breathing
of the Spirit of the Lord, by which means these tumultuous waves
shall be laid over, and God's ark in a while made to rest upon the
top of his mountain (2 Sam 22:19). For by the breath of the Lord
the earth is lightened, and by this lightning coals are kindled;
"yea, he sent out his arrows and scattered them, and he shot out
lightnings, and discomfited them. Then the channels of waters
were seen, and the foundations of the world were discovered at thy
rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils" (Psa
18:14,15). "And God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the
waters asswaged." That is, in New Testament language, the afflictors
and afflictions of the church did cease and decay, and came to
nought.

"And the waters asswaged": To wit, by the blowing of this wind,
wherefore, as this wind did assault the waters, so it did refresh
the spirit of this servant of God, because by it the affliction
was driven away. Thus then by the wind of the Lord were these dry
bones refreshed, and made to stand upon their feet (Eze 37:9,10).

"And God made a wind to pass over." And God made it; when God
blows, the enemies of his truth shall pass away like waters that
fail.

Ver. 2. "The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven
were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained."

By these words we see, that when the church of God is afflicted,
both heaven and hell have their hand therein, but so as from
a differing consideration, and to a diverse end. From heaven it
comes, that we may remember we have sinned, and that we may be
made white, and tried (Dan 11:35); but from hell, from the great
deep, that we might sin the more, and that we might despair, and
be damned (Job 1:11; 2:5).

"And the fountains of the great deep." When God begins to slack
and abate the afflictions of his church, he rebukes, as it were
first, the powers of hell; for should he take off his own hand,
while they have leave to do what they list, the church for this
would be worse not better: But first he rebuketh them: "The Lord
rebuke thee, O Satan," that's the first; and then he clothes them
"with change of raiment" (Zech 3:1-5): The fountains of the great
deep were stopped, and then the bottles of heaven (Gen 15:14).

"And the rain from heaven was restrained," or held back, or made
to cease. Afflictions are governed by God, both as to time, number,
nature and measure. "In measure when it shooteth forth, thou wilt
debate with it: he stayeth his rough wind in the day of his east
wind" (Isa 27:8). Our times therefore, and our conditions in those
times, are in the hand of God; yea, and so are our souls and
bodies, to be kept and preserved from the evil, while the rod of
God is upon us (Jer 15:1-3).

Ver. 3. "And the waters returned from off the earth continually:
and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were
abated."

The verse before doth treat of the original, the fountains of the
deep, and the windows of heaven, that they were shut, or stopped;
which being done, the effect beginneth to cease. Hence note, that
case and release from persecution and affliction cometh not by
chance, or by the good moods, or gentle dispositions of men, but
the Lord doth hold them back from sin, the Lord restraineth them.
It is said "the Lord stirred up the adversaries of Solomon" (1 Kings
11:14,23). Again, when the Syrians fought against Jehoshaphat, "the
Lord helped him, and God moved them to depart from him" (2 Chron
18:31). The Lord sent the flood, and the Lord took it away.

"And the waters returned from off the earth continually." When God
ceaseth to be angry, the hearts and dispositions of the adversaries
shall be palliated, and made more flexible. It is said, when the
afflictions of Israel were ended in Egypt, the hearts of the people
were turned to pity them; yea, he caused them "to be pitied of
all those that carried them captives" (Psa 106:46).

When you see therefore, that the hearts of kings and governors
begin to be moderated toward the church of God, then acknowledge
that this is the hand of God. "I," saith he, "will cause the
enemy to entreat thee well in the time of evil, and in the time
of affliction" (Jer 15:11). For by waters here are typed out the
great and mighty of the world, by the flowing of them, their rage;
and by their ebbing and returning their stillness and moderation.
"And the waters returned." That is, to the sea (Gen 1:9,10). "He
gathereth the waters of the sea together as an heap: he layeth up
the depth in store houses" (Psa 33:7).

By "gathering up," the persecutors may be understood, his gathering
them to their graves, as he did Herod, who stood in the way of
Christ (Matt 2:19,20). And as he did those in Ezekiel, who hindered
the promotion of truth, and the exaltation of the gospel (31:14).

"And after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were
abated." These words then imply, that for so long time, Noah, and
the church with him, were to exercise patience. They also show us,
That when the waters are up, they do not suddenly fall: They were
up four hundred years, from Abraham to Moses (Gen 15:13). They
were up threescore and ten years in the days of the captivity of
Babylon (Jer 25:12; Zech 1:12). They were up ten mystical days in
the persecution that was in the days of Antipas (Rev 2:10). And are
to be up forty and two months, in the reign, and under the tyranny
of antichrist (13:5). But they will abate; the house of Saul will
grow weaker; yea, they shall be gathered to their sea, and shall
be laid in the pit; yea, they shall not be on the earth, when God
shall set glory in the land of the living (Eze 26:19-21).

Ver. 4. "And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth
day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat."

These instances therefore were a type of Christ, the munition of
rocks (Isa 33:16), who is elsewhere called, the mountain of the
Lord's house (Micah 4:1); the rock upon which he will build his
church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it (Matt
16:18). For after the ark had felt the ground, or had got settlement
upon the tops of these mountains; however, the waters that came
from the great deep, did notwithstanding, for some time, shake,
and make it stir, yet off from these mountains they could not get
it with all their rage and fury. It rested there; these gates of
hell could not prevail. But mark, it did rest on these mountains
almost a quarter of a year, before any ground appeared to Noah.
A right figure of saving faith; for that maketh not outward
observation a ground and foundation for faith, but Christ the
rock, who as to sense and feeling is at first quite out of sight.
Hence the hope of the godly is compared to the anchor of a ship,
which resteth on, or taketh hold of the rock that is now invisible
under the water, at the bottom of the sea (Heb 6:19).

This then should learn us to stay on the Lord Jesus, and there to
rest when the waters have drowned all the world, and when all the
mountains and hills for help are as if they were cast into the
midst of the sea.

That is an excellent saying of the prophet, "God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will not we
fear, though the earth be removed, [as now it seemed] and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea; Though the
waters thereof roar and be troubled; though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. Selah" (Psa 46:1-3).

Ver. 5. "And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month:
in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops
of the mountains seen."

In the third verse we read, that after an hundred and fifty days"
flood, the waters returned; that is, began to return, from off the
earth: Which beginning of their return, was, because that God had
mercifully remembered the prayer and affliction of Noah. Again, in
this verse we read, that from the day that the ark did rest upon
the mountains of Ararat, the waters decreased continually. Now the
resting of the ark on the mountain, was a figure of our trusting
on Christ. Hence it follows, that the tumults and raging of the
mystical waters, are made to decrease by the power of faith: "This
is the victory, even our faith" (1 John 5:4). As it is also said
of Moses, "By faith they passed through the Red sea" (Heb 11:29).
But above all take that as most pertinent, "Through faith they
subdued kingdoms,--stopped the mouths of lions,--and turned to
flight the armies of aliens" (Heb 11:33,34). Here you see faith
made the waters decrease; it took away the heat and rage of the
adversary.

"And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month,
[another period of time,] and in the first day of the tenth month
were the tops of the mountains seen." These mountains were before
the flood, a type of the hope of the hypocrites, and therefore
then were swallowed up, fifteen cubits under the waters. But now,
methinks, they should be a figure to the church of some visible
ground of deliverance from the flood; for almost three months the
ark did rest on the invisible mountains of Ararat. But now are the
tops of the mountains seen: A further sign that the waters were
abated; and a ground, that at length they would be quite dried up.
Let these mountains then be types of the high and mighty, which
God is used to stir up to deliver his church from the heat and rage
of tyranny and persecution, as they are often termed and called in
scripture, the mountains of Israel, for this very end. So then,
from our thus considering the mountains, Two things we are taught
thereby.

1. That when the great ones of this world begin to discover
themselves to the church, by way of encouragement, it is a sign
that the waters are now decreasing. Or thus: When God lets us see
the tops of the mountains, then we may certainly conclude, that
the rage of the waters abate.

Doubtless when God made promise of raising up Josias to Israel,
in Canaan (1 Kings 13:1-3); and of raising up for them Cyrus, in
Babylon (Isa 45; Eze 1:1-3). The thus appearing of the tops of
these mountains, was comfort to the church in her day of affliction.

2. This should teach us while we are in affliction, to look this way
and that, if it may be that the tops of the mountains may be seen
by us (1 Sam 11:1-3). For though it be too much below a Christian
to place his confidence in men, yet when God shall raise up Josias
or a Cyrus, we may take encouragement at this working of God.
Therefore is that in the Psalms read both ways, shall I look to the
mountains? "I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence
cometh my help. Yet so, as that he would also conclude his help
did come from the Lord" (Psa 121:1,2). So then, we must take heed
that we look not to the mountains [alone]. Again, it is our wisdom
"to look to the mountains": only look not to them but when God
discovers them. Look unto them if God discovereth them; yet then
but so as means of God's appointing. But again, God doth not let
us see the hills for our help, before we have first of all seen
them drowned. Look not to them therefore while the water is at
the rising; but if they begin to cease their raging, if they begin
to fall, and with that the tops of the mountains be seen, you may
look upon them with comfort, they are tokens of God's deliverance.

Ver. 6. "And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah
opened the window of the ark which he had made."

These forty days seem to commence from the discovery of the tops
of the mountains. Wherefore he did not presently go out of the
ark, but stayed there above fourteen days still, signifying unto
us, that we must not be therefore delivered so soon as the tops of
the mountains are seen, but may yet be assaulted with the waters
of the flood, days, and weeks, and months, &c.

When Moses was sent to deliver Israel, they came not presently out
of Egypt; neither seemed their burthens ever the light to sense or
feeling, though faith indeed did see the end (Exo 5:15-23). Again,
When he had brought them forth of Egypt, they came not in a day,
or a month, to Canaan; but, saith the Holy Ghost, He brought them
out, (or, forth of affliction) after that he had showed wonders
and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the
wilderness forty years.

Let us therefore take heed of a feverish spirit, while we behold
"the tops of the mountains"; possibly, for all they are visible
tokens to us of deliverance, themselves may be yet much under
water. We see what work Moses, Gideon, Jephthah and Samson had
to deliver Israel, even after more than their tops were seen. Be
content to stay yet forty days. David stayed, after he was anointed,
till years and times went over him, before he could deliver Israel
from the tyranny of its opposers.

"At the end of forty days Noah opened the window of the ark." This
opening of the window also, was a type, that now he was preparing
to take possession of the world. It also might be a type of the
opening the law and testimony, that light might by that come into
the church; for we find not that this window had any other use,
but to be a conveyance of light into the ark, and as a passage for
the raven and the dove, as may be further showed after. Now much
like this, is that of John: "The temple of God was opened in heaven,
and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament" (Rev
11:19). And again, "I looked, and, behold, the temple of the
tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened." And then, as
the raven, and the dove came out of the window of the ark; so "the
angels," that is, the Lord's executioners, "came out of the temple"
that was opened in heaven (Rev 15:5,6).

Hence note, That though men may be borne with, if they lie in their
holes in the height of the tempest; but to do it when the tops of
the mountains were seen, if they then shall forbear to open their
window, they are worthy of blame indeed. When the lepers saw the
Assyrians were fled, and that liberty from heaven was granted to
Samaria, then they feared to conceal the thing any further; They
feared, I say, that if they went not to the city to declare it,
some judgment of God would befall them (2 Kings 7:9).

Ver. 7, 8. "And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and
fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth. Also he
sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from
off the face of the ground."

Behold, the raven and dove are now sent out at the window of the
ark, as the angels are said to come out of the temple, when it was
opened in heaven. This raven therefore, and the dove, were figures
and types of those angels (Rev 15:5,6).

But to speak to them both apart. The raven went forth, but returned
not again to the ark. This is intimated by these words, "She went
to and fro, until the waters were abated, and dried up." This is
further evident by that antithesis that the word doth put between
the practice of the raven and the dove. The raven went forth, and
went to and fro till the waters were dried up. But mark it, "But
the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned
unto him into the ark" (v 9). The raven then did find rest elsewhere,
the raven then returned not to him into the ark.

But what did the raven then do? Why, certainly she made a banquet
of the carcasses of the giants that were drowned by the flood; it
fed upon the flesh of the men that had sinned against the Lord.

The raven therefore was a type of those messengers that God sends
out of his temple against Antichrist; that is, for "eating the flesh
of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men,
and the flesh of horses." He was, I say, a type of those professors
that God saith he hath a great sacrifice to sacrifice unto, a
sort of professors in his church; as the raven was one that had
his being in the ark: These are they which Ezekiel mentions, that
were to eat flesh, and drink blood; to eat the fat till they be
filled, and to drink blood till they be drunken (39:17-20). These
also are the guests that Zephaniah mentions, and saith, God hath
bidden to the same feast also (1:7-14).

And let no man be offended that I say these birds are in the church:
For one effect of the sixth vial, was that battle of the great day
of God Almighty (Rev 16:16). Further, The angel that proclaims this
feast, calls to those that are God's guests, by the name of, "the
fowls that fly in the midst of heaven": That they should "come and
gather together to the supper of the great God: That they may eat
the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of
mighty men," &c. (Rev 19:17,18). Besides, this supper is the effect
of the going forth of the King of kings against the Antichristian
whore, whose going forth was at the opening of heaven, as the
going forth of the raven was at the opening of the window of the
ark (v 11-16).

Note therefore, That God, in the overthrow of the kingdom of
Antichrist, and at the asswaging of the rage of her tumultuous
waves, will send forth his birds amongst her fat ones, to partake
of the banquet that he hath appointed; who when they shall be
tolerated by that angel that standeth in the sun, will come down
to their feast with such greediness, that neither king nor captain
shall keep them from their prey: They will eat flesh, and fat,
till they be full, and drink the blood till they be drunk.

"Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were
abated." This dove was a type of another sort of professors in the
church, that are of a more gentle nature (Matt 10:16); for all
the saints are not for such work as the raven; they are not all
for feeding upon the carcasses, the kingdoms and estates of the
Antichristian party, but are for spending their time, and for
bending their spirits to a more spiritual and retired work; even
as the dove is said to be harmless, and to mourn for communion
with her companion (Isa 38:14), and that is content if she hath
her nest in the sides of the rock, Christ (Jer 48:28). Wherefore
he adds,

Ver. 9. "But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and
she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the
face of the whole earth," &c.

The dove could not live as the raven; the raven being content, so
long as she found the carcasses; but the dove found no rest till
she returned again to Noah.

The raven therefore, though he was in the ark, was not a type of
the most spiritual Christian; nay rather, I think, of the worldly
professor, who gets into the church in the time of her affliction,
as Ziba did into the army of David, in the day of his trouble; not
for love to the grace of David, but that, if time should serve, he
might be made the Lord of his master's inheritance (2 Sam 16:1-4).
But David was content to let him go with him, and that too as
under such a consideration: as Christ also lets these ravens to
herd with his innocent doves; because he hath flesh to give them,
which the doves care not for eating.[35]

"But the dove found no rest." It seems the raven did, as it
is also with some professors, who when they by their profession
have advanced themselves to some worldly honour, they have ease
and rest, though, like the raven, they have it by going out of
the church.

"But the dove found no rest." Though all the enemies of God lay
tumbling in the sea, this could not satisfy a gracious soul: divide
her from the ark, and she finds no rest, she is not at ease till
she be with Noah. "And she returned unto him into the ark;--and
he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him
into the ark" (v 9).

Noah here was a type of Christ, who took the dove unto him:
And it shows us, That Christ hath a bosom open for the cries and
complaints of his people; for the dove returned a-weary with the
tidings of this, that the waters still raged. A fit figure of those
of the saints that are groaning and weary under the oppression
and cruelty of the enemy.

Hence note, That though thou hast no other tidings to Christ but
sighs and groans, and weariness, because of the rage of the waters;
yet he will not despise thee; yea, he invites thee, as weary, to
come (Matt 11:28-30).

Ver. 10. "And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent
forth the dove out of the ark."

This staying shows us, That he exercised patience, waiting God's
leisure till the flood should be taken away. This grace therefore
had yet seven day's work to do, before he obtained any further
testimony that the waters were decreasing. O this staying work is
hard work! Alas! sometimes patience is accompanied with so much
heat and feverishness, that every hour seems seven until the end
of the trial, and the blessing promised be possessed by the waiting
soul. It may be Noah might not be altogether herein a stranger: I
am sure the Psalmist was not, in that he often under affliction,
cries, But how long, O Lord! for ever! (Psa 6:3; 79:5; 13:1; 74:1;
89:46). Make haste! O Lord, how long! (90:13; 94:3).

"And again he sent forth the dove." The first time he sent her,
she brought no good news, but came panting and weary home; yet he
sends her a second time.

This should teach us, not to make conclusions too suddenly about
God's dispensation, saying it must be now or never; for it may be
the seven days are not out. The men of David said, This is the
day that the Lord will give thee the kingdom of Israel: But David
perceived otherwise, and therefore adds yet to his temperance,
patience (1 Sam 24:1-4; 26:8-10). Not sullenly saying like that
wicked king, Why should I wait on the Lord any longer? (2 Kings
6:32). But comforts himself with the truth of the promise, saying,
His time shall come to die, &c. He that believeth, maketh not
haste, but waiteth patiently, for the perfecting God's work in
God's time. That is excellent in the song: "I charge you [saith the
church] that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, until he please"
(Cant 8:4). Noah was much for this, wherefore he stayed yet other
seven days.

"And again he sent forth the dove." Elias did much like this, when
his servant, at the first sending, brought him no tidings of rain,
he gave him his errand again, saying, Go again: go seven times
(1 Kings 18:43-45). As Noah here did with the dove, and again he
sent her. Seeming delays are no hindrance to faith; they ought to
try it, and put it into exercise: As here it was with this good
man about the waters of the flood; he fainted not, but believed
to see the goodness of the Lord. That in the prophet is notable
as to this, "The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the
end it shall speak, and not lie: thought it tarry, wait for it;
because it will surely come, it will not tarry" (Hab 2:3).

Ver. 11. "And the dove came in to him in the evening; and lo! in
her mouth was an olive-leaf plucked off: so Noah knew that the
waters were abated from off the earth."

"And the dove came in to him in the evening." Wherefore his
patience was tried this day also. All the day he heard nothing of
his dove. Surely she could not keep the wing all the day. Is she
drowned I tro? Is she lost? O, no! She comes at last, though she
stayed long. Samuel also stayed long before he came to Saul; but
Saul could not wait as Noah did, therefore he had not the benefit
of the mercy promised.

"The dove came in to him in the evening, and lo, in her mouth was
an olive-leaf," &c. Now he is recompensed for the exercise of
patience: As also was Abraham when God gave him Isaac; for after
he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise.

"And lo, an olive-leaf." A sign that God was going through with
his work of diminishing the waters: A sign, I say, and a good
experience of the continued love of God to his servant; according
to that of Paul, "patience worketh experience"; that is, it at
last obtaineth the blessing promised, and so settleth the soul in
a fresh experience of the love and faithfulness of God.

And lo! This word Lo, it is, as it were an appeal to all readers
to judge, whether God to Noah was faithful or no. So then, this
was not written for his sake only, but for us also that believe
in God, that we might now exercise patience, as Noah; and obtain
the tokens of God's goodness, as he; for lo the dove, at last,
though 'twas night first, came to Noah into the ark, "and lo in
her mouth was an olive-leaf plucked off: so Noah knew that the
waters were abated."

"An olive-leaf plucked off." These words, an olive-leaf plucked
off, do intimate, that Noah was now inquisitive and searching how
the dove obtained the leaf; that is, whether she found it as dead,
and upon the waters; or whether she plucked it off some tree: But
he found by the greenness and freshness of the slip, that she
plucked it off from the olive. Wherefore, he had good ground now
to be comforted; for if this leaf was plucked off from a tree, then
the waters could not be deep; especially, because as the story
tells us, the olive used also to stand in the bottoms, or valleys.

This should teach us, That not over highly we conclude messages or
tokens, to be signs of God's mercy. There are lying visions, and
they are causes of banishment; they we should beware of, or else
we are not only at present deceived, but our faith is in danger
of the rocks; for not a few have cast up all, because the truth
of some seeming vision hath failed. Mark how David handleth the
messenger that brought him tidings of the death of Saul: says he,
How dost thou know that Saul is dead? What proof canst thou make
of the truth of this story? (1 Sam 1:1-10). So should we say of
all those visions or messengers that come to persuade us, that
either inward or outward deliverance is for us at the door. Prove
these stories; look if they be not dead and lifeless fancies; see
if you can find that they were plucked off from the tree that is
green.

Ver. 12. "And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the
dove; which returned not again unto him any more."

We read before of forty days' patience, and after that of seven
days' patience; and that after the waters began to return from off
the earth, and here again of seven days more. Whence not, That the
best of God's people, in the times of trials, find their patience
too short-winded to hold out the whole length of a trial, unless
the time be, as it were, cut in pieces. The prophet when he was to
lay siege against Jerusalem, he must rest the one side, by turning
him upon the other (Eze 4:2-6). It was with holy Job exceeding
hard, when he might not have time to swallow his spittle, when he
might not a little sit down and rest him. And if you observe him,
he doth not desire an absolute deliverance as yet, but only time
to take wind and breathe awhile; and then, if God will, to engage
in the combat again:[36] "How long [saith he] wilt thou not depart
from me." Depart: what quite? O! No, saith he, I beg not that
absolutely, but only so long as till a man might "swallow down
his spittle" (Job 7:19). This the church in Ezra's time took as
an exceeding favour. "And now [say they] for a little space, grace
hath been shewed from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to
escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may
lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage"
(Ezra 9:8).

"And he stayed yet other seven days." Note again, That it is not
God's way with his people to shew them all their troubles at once;
but first he shews them a part; first forty days, after that seven
other days, and yet again seven days more; that, they coming upon
them by piecemeal, they may the better be able to travel through
them. While Israel was in affliction in Egypt, they knew not the
trial that would meet them at the Red Sea. Again, When they had
gone through that, they little thought that yet "for forty years
they must be tempted and proved in the wilderness."

And thus it was with this blessed Noah; he thought that by the
first seven days his trials might be ended. But behold, there is
yet seven days more behind: "and he stayed yet other seven days."

Further: There may also be by these words thus much insinuated,
That these periods of time might be also of Noah's prefixing: and
if so, then note, That the people of God in these days are not
the first that have been under mistake, as to the timing of their
afflictions. Noah counted it would end many days before it ended
indeed, even seven days, and seven days, and seven days to that;
for he sent forth his dove about the beginning of the first month,
in which month also were his two seven days' trials. Again, after
that he had stayed two seven days more, to wit, to the end of that
first month. Again, he stayed almost four sevens more; for he came
not out of the ark till the twenty-seventh day of the second month.

Hence therefore let Christians beware that they set not times for
God, lest all men see their folly. "It is not for you to know the
times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power"
(Acts 1:7). Yea, I say again, take heed lest that for thy setting
of God a seven days' time, he set not thee so many as seven times
seven.

"And he sent forth the dove, which returned not again unto him
any more." This is the third time that the dove was sent to see
how the waters were abated on the face of the earth. The first
time she, by her restlessness, bespake the waters to be high and
mighty. The second time, by her olive-leaf, she notifieth that the
waters were low and ebbing. But this third time, she seems to be
weary or her service, she returned not again to him any more; yet
in her so absenting herself, she gives confirmation to Noah, that
the waters were even in a manner quite gone. If he will take this
for a proof let him, if not, let him hang in suspense with himself.
Hence note, that God will not be always testifying, by renewing of
his tokens, to that about which we have had sufficient conviction
before; for in so doing he should gratify and humour our unbelief.
Noah had received already two sufficient testimonies that the waters
were decreasing. First by his seeing the tops of the mountains, and
then by the olive-leaf; but notwithstanding these two testimonies,
his unbelief in part remains; but God will not humour such
a groundless mistrust, by giving him any further token, than the
very absenting of the dove. Much like this was that of Samson's
father; the angel once had told his wife, that she should have
a son that should deliver Israel; well, Manoah heard of this, he
also desired that he might see that man that had told his wife this
happy news. Now God thus far condescends, as to send the angel a
second time; but then, this being now a sufficient antidote against
their unbelief, the angel after the next departing, was not seen
again of them at all. But saith the word, The angel of the Lord
did no more appear to Manoah, and to his wife: So that now they
must live by faith, or not at all (Judg 13:3,9,21).

God's dealing with his people with respect to their spiritual
condition, is much like this. The Holy Ghost doth not use to confirm
us by new revelations of grace and justification, so often as by
our fond doubts or mistrust we call for and desire the same. But
having confirmed in us the testimony of Christ, it may be twice
or thrice, (for the testimony of two men are true) he then expects
we should live by faith. And observe it, if we have after such
testimony joyful communion with God, it is either by retreating to
former experience, or by arguing according to faith; that because
God hath done thus before, he therefore hath given me interest in
such and such promises and mercies besides.

I speak now of the first seals of the love of God to the soul,
after we have been sufficiently tossed upon the waves of unbelief,
as Noah was by the waters of the flood: such seals are few, the
Lord gave them to Solomon twice (1 Kings 11:9). And also twice to
his servant Paul (Acts 22:6,18). 'Tis enough that they have seen
"the tops of the mountains," and have had brought to them the
olive-leaf. Let them now believe this confirmation of mercy is
sufficient, and if they will not believe now, they shall not be
established.

Ver. 13. "And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year,
in the first month, the fist day of the month, the waters were
dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the
ark, and looked, and behold, the face of the ground was dry."

"And it came to pass." That is, by the working of God, that the
waters were dried up. This came to pass in God's time, to wit, in
"the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first
day of the month"; not in the times of Noah's prefixing. God's
time is THE time, the best time, because it is the time appointed
by him for the proof and trial of our graces, and that in which
so much, and so much of the rage of the enemy, and of the power
of God's mercy, may the better be discovered unto us; "I the Lord
will hasten it in HIS time" (Isa 60:22), not before, though we
were the signet upon his right hand (Jer 22:24).

Noah the only man with God in that generation, could not be restored
before the time; no more could Israel from the thraldom of Egypt
(Exo 13:4). Yea, the Son of God himself must here give place and
be content. And when Satan had ended all the temptation, when he
"had ended all,--then he departed from him for a season" (Luke
4:13).

"And Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked." The failing
again of his expected comforter, caused him to be up and doing;
probably he had not as yet uncovered the ark, that is, to look
round about him had the dove by returning pleased his humour; but
she failing him, he stirs up himself, Thus it should also be with
the Christian now: doth he dove forbear to come to thee with
a leaf in her bill as before, let not this make thee sullen and
mistrustful, but uncover the ark, and look, and by looking thou
shalt see a further testimony of what thou receivedst by the first
manifestations: "He looked, and behold the earth was dry." Paul
tells us, that by looking we have a testimony like, or as that,
which at first was given us by the Spirit of the Lord (2 Cor 3:18).
"And behold the face of the earth was dry."

Ver. 14. "And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day
of the month, was the earth dried."

This prospect was like the rain that we read of in another place,
that confirmed God's inheritance when it was weary: It was a
comfortable sight to Noah to see that the face of the earth was
dry; and now he could wait upon God with less trial and strain to
his patience the remaining days, which were fifty and four, to
wit, from the first of the first, to the twenty-seventh of the
second month, than he could one of the sevens that he met with
before. Indeed the path is narrowest just at entrance as also our
nature is then the most untoward; but after we are in, the walk
seems to be wider and easy; the flesh is also then more mortified
and conformable. The walk is but a cubit wide at the door, but
inward ten times as broad (Eze 42:4,11).

"And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
month, was the earth dried." So that from the first day it began
to rain, which was the seventeenth day of the second month in
the year before, unto this day, was Noah in the ark; it was just
a year and ten days. That was the time then that God had appointed
to try his servant Noah, by the waters of the flood: in which time
he was so effectually crucified to the things of the world, that
he was as if he was never more to enjoy the same. Wherefore Peter
making mention of this estate of his, he tells us, it was even
like unto our baptism; wherein we profess ourselves dead to the
world, and alive to God by Jesus Christ (1 Peter 3:21).

In the first verse of this chapter, we read that God remembered
Noah; but till now we read not, that the face of the earth was
dried. Hence note that our being under the rage of the enemy, doth
not argue that we are therefore forgotten of God, "he remembereth
us in our low estate," even when tossed to and fro by the waters
of a flood of temptations.

Ver. 15, 16. "And God spake unto Noah, saying, Go forth of the ark,
thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee."

Now we are come to the end of the trial, and so to the time of
Noah's deliverance, and behold as he went in, so he came out: He
went into the ark at the commandment of the Lord. "And the Lord
said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark" (Gen
7:1). And here again, "And God spake unto Noah, saying, Go forth
of the ark." Hence note, that notwithstanding the earth was dry
about fifty-four days before, yet Noah waited for the word of God
for his commission to bring him forth of the ark. Providence seemed
to smile before, in that the earth was dry, to which had but Noah
added reason, he must have concluded, the time is come for me to
go forth of the ark. But Noah knew, that as well the providences
of God, as the waters of the flood might be to try his dependence
on the word of the Lord: wherefore, though he saw this, yet because
he had no answer of God, he will not take the opportunity.

It is dangerous, or at least very difficult, to make the most
smiling providence of God our rule to act by: Had David done it,
he had killed Saul before the time, But David respected the word
of God (2 Sam 24:17-20). Elisha also would not suffer the king
to make that improvement of the providence of God, which reason
should be put in execution, when he rebuked the king's desire
that he had to have killed the Syrians, and commanded that bread
should be set before them, that they might eat, and go home again
to their master (2 Kings 6:19-23). Hear the word of the Lord,
ye that tremble at his word. "At the commandment of the Lord the
children of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of the Lord
they pitched.--At the commandment of the Lord they rested in their
tents, and at the commandment of the Lord they journeyed; they
kept the charge of the Lord, at the commandment of the Lord, by
the hand of Moses" (Num 9:18-23).

"Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy
sons' wives with thee."

When God delivereth, he delivereth completely. Thus Israel also
went out of Egypt, they, their wives, their children, with their
flocks and herds, not an hoof was left behind (Exo 10:24-26). When
David's time was come to possess the kingdom, he brought along
with him those six hundred men that had been his companions in his
suffering state, every man with his household. But I say, he went
up to possess it, not simply by the voice of providence, though
Saul was dead, but "David inquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go
up into any of the cities of Judah?" Nay, a general answer, even
from God, would not satisfy this holy man. "The Lord said,--Go,
but David replied, Whither shall I go? and he said unto Hebron"
(1 Sam 2:1). Oh! it is safe to regard the word of the Lord; this
makes us all come safe to land. When men wrest themselves from under
the hand of God, taking such opportunities for their deliverance,
which are laid before them only for trial of obedience to the
word: they may, it is probable, have a seeming success; the end
will be as with Zedekiah king of Judah, affliction with addition.
The Jews that were left in the land of Israel, from the hand of
the king of Babylon, would flee to the land of Egypt (Jer 41:17),
that they might have quietness there, but they went without the
word of God, and therefore their rest brought them to their ruin
(42; 43).

Noah therefore chose the safest way, even to stay in the ark, till
God's word came. As it is also said of Joseph, "The word of the
Lord tried him"; till the word of the Lord came to deliver him,
and then he had deliverance indeed (Psa 105:19), as Noah also and
David had safe deliverance for himself and relations.

Ver. 17. "Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with
thee, of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed
abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the
earth."

Noah was not only to have in this deliverance, respect to himself
and family, but to the good of all the world. Men's spirits are too
narrow for the mind of God, when their chief end, or their only
design in their enjoying this or the other mercy, is for the sake
of their ownselves only. It cannot be according to God, that such
desires should be encouraged: "none of us liveth unto himself,"
why then should we desire life only for ourselves.

The church cries thus, "God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and
cause his face to shine upon us." Why? "That thy way may be known
upon earth, thy saving health among all nations" (Psa 67:1,2).

So David, "Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold
me with thy free spirit. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways;
and sinners shall be converted unto thee" (Psa 51:12,13). So then,
we must not desire to come out of trials and afflictions alone, or
by ourselves, but that in our deliverance the salvation of many
may be concerned. It is said, when Israel went up out of Egypt,
there went up with them "a mixed multitude," to wit, of Egyptians,
and other nations: This going out of captivity was right, they
carried out with them the fowls, the beasts, and the creeping
things; to wit, the heathens of other lands, and so added increase
to the church of God (Exo 12:37,38). In Esther's time also, when
the Jews came from under the snare of Haman, they brought with them
to God many of the people of the provinces. "Many of the people
of the land became Jews" (Esth 8:17).

These words therefore, "bring forth with thee every living thing,"
&c. are not lightly to be passed over; for they shew us, that we
ought in our deliverance to have special respect to the deliverance
of others. And if our deliverance be with the word and liking of
God, it must needs have this effect. "When I shall bring again
their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the
captivity of Samaria, and her daughters, then will I bring again
the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them" (Eze 17:53).

And indeed there is reason for this, for in every affliction and
persecution, the devil's design is to impair Christ's kingdom:
wherefore no marvel, that God designeth in our deliverance, the
impairing and lessening the kingdom of sin and Satan. Wherefore,
O thou church of God in England, which art now upon the waves of
affliction, and temptation, when thou comest out of the furnace,
if thou come out at the bidding of God, there shall come out
with thee the fowl, the beast, and abundance of creeping things.
"O Judah, he hath set an harvest for thee, when I returned the
captivity of my people" (Hosea 6:11).

"That they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and
multiply upon the earth."

This was God's end in preserving the creatures from the flood, that
again the earth might be replenished therewith. The same end he
hath in his suffering of the persecutors, and all manner of adversity
to take away but "a part," some (Amos 7:4). Some of them they shall
kill and crucify, leaving a remnant alive in the world, namely,
that they might breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful,
and multiply upon the earth. As he saith by the prophet Isaiah,
"He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall
blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit" (Isa
27:6). And this after their deliverance from persecution: According
as he saith again, "The remnant that is escaped of the house of
Judah, shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward: For
out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant" that is yet to replenish
the earth with converts (37:32). As Luke observes, that when the
churches in Judea, Galilee, and Samaria had rest, they "walking in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were
multiplied" (Acts 9:31).

Ver. 18. "And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his
sons' wives with him." Obedience is better than sacrifice. Noah is
at the beck of God, what he bid him do, that does he; and indeed
this is in truth to worship God, yea, this is to know and worship
God. It is said of Abraham, when he went at God's command to offer
up Isaac, that he counted it going to worship the Lord (Gen 22:5).
And God saith of Hezekiah, that he did "judgment and justice,"
judging the cause of the poor and needy; and then adds, Is not
this "to know me, saith the Lord?" (Jer 22:15,16). I bring these
to shew, that obedience to the word of God, is the true character
of God's people in all ages; and this very text, as also such
others before, is on purpose recorded by the Holy Ghost, to shew
you, that Noah was obedient in all things; yea, I may add, these
commands were to discover the proof of him, whether he would
be obedient in all things; and this was also his way with New
Testament churches (2 Cor 2:9). The sincerity of love, and of the
uprightness of the heart, is greatly discovered by the commandments
of God. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them," saith
Christ, "he it is that loveth me" &c. (John 14:21).

Ver. 19. "Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and
whatsoever creepeth upon the earth after their kinds, went forth
out of the ark."

These words are yet a further expression of the sincerity of Noah's
obedience, for that he at the command of God, did carefully search
and seek out every little creeping thing that God had brought to
him into the ark. Obedience in little things do ofttimes prove us
most; for we through the pride of our hearts are apt to look over
little things, because though commanded, they are but little (Jer
23:38). O, but Noah was of another spirit, he carefully looked
after little things, even after every thing, "whatsoever creepeth
upon the earth"; and not only so, but sought diligently that they
might go out in order, to wit, male and female, according to their
kind. Sometimes God would have men exact to a word, sometimes
exact to a tache, or pin, or loop (Exo 36:12,13); sometimes to a
step (Eze 40:3,4,37). Be careful then in little things, but yet
leave not the other undone (Matt 23:23).

Indeed the command of God is great; if HE therefore commands us
to worship him, though but with a bird, we must not count such
ordinances insignificant, or below a human creature (Lev 14:52).

Ver. 20. "And Noah builded an altar unto the LORD, and took of every
clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt-offerings
on the altar."

This is the fist work that we read Noah did, when he came forth of
the ark; and it shews us, that at this time he had a deep sense
of the distinguishing mercy of God. And indeed he had sufficient
cause to wonder, for the whole world was drowned, save only himself,
and they that were with him in the ark.

But I say, this was the first work, to wit, "to worship God." Hence
note, That a sense of mercy, of distinguishing mercy, naturally
engageth the heart to worship. It is said of Moses, when the name
of the Lord was proclaimed before him, as "merciful and gracious,
--and abundant in goodness and truth,--and that he pardoned iniquity,
transgression and sin"; that he "made haste, and bowed his head
toward the earth, and worshipped" (Exo 34:8).

"And Noah builded an altar." Although this altar be the first that
we read of, yet forasmuch as there was before a blessed church,
and also an open profession of godliness, together with offering
sacrifice, in all probability this was not the first altar that
was builded unto the Lord. Besides, we read not of any immediate
revelation, from which Noah had light and instruction to build it.
The text only saith, he built an altar unto the Lord; which may be
aptly expounded, according as he was wont in the other world.

This altar was a type of Christ, as capacitated to bear the sin of
the world (for the altar was it, upon which the sacrifices were
burnt;) wherefore it, in mine opinion, in special respected his
Godhead, by the power of which he offered himself, that is, his
flesh. Again it is said, "The altar sanctifieth the gift" (Matt
23:19). So did the Godhead the humanity of Christ, through which
"eternal Spirit, he offered himself without spot to God" (Heb
9:14). By this altar then this blessed man preached to his family
the Godhead and eternity of Christ.

"And took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl." These
beasts and fowls were types of the flesh of the Son of God, as Paul
in the ninth and tenth chapters to the Hebrews affirms; wherefore
by this act he also preached to his family the incarnation of the
Lord Christ, how that "in the fulness of time" he should in our
flesh offer himself a sacrifice for us; for as all the ordinances
of the New Testament ministration preach to us, That Christ is
come; so all the ordinances of worship under the Old Testament
preached to them that were under it, Christ, as yet TO come.

"Of every clean beast and of every clean fowl." This was to shew,
That when Christ did come, he should not take hold of the Jew, and
exclude the Gentile; but that in his flesh he should present unto
God EVERY clean beast, and EVERY clean fowl; that is, all the
elect, both of Jew and Gentile (Acts 10:11-16).

And it was requisite that this by Noah should be preached, because
the whole world was yet in his family; from whence, at the
multiplication of men, if through their rebellion and idolatry they
lost not this doctrine, they might to all their offspring preach
the Lord Jesus.

Wherefore, the doctrine of the gospel, had the world been faithful,
might have been to this day retained amongst them that now are the
most barbarous people.[37]

Ver. 21. "And the Lord smelled a sweet savour; [a savour of rest;]
and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground
any more for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is
evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every
living thing, as I have done."

These words more fully shew, that this sacrifice of Noah was a
type of the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ, he being said
to be that blessed sacrifice that is as perfume in the nostrils
of God: "He gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to
God for a sweet-smelling savour" (Eph 5:2). Besides, this offering
of Noah was a burnt-offering to God; which burning signified, the
curse of God, which Christ was made in his death for us. Wherefore,
the burnt offerings were all along a type of him; as by reading
the epistle to the Hebrews you may see: "It is the burnt-offering,
[saith God,] because of the burning upon the altar all night unto
the morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it"
(Lev 6:9). Which was a type of the fire of the law, and the guilt
of sin, that Christ, when he offered himself, should undergo for
the sins of man.

"And the Lord smelled a sweet savour." This signifies the content
and satisfaction that for the sin of the world, God should have by
the offering upon of his Son for us upon the cross: Wherefore, he
is said to be now "in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their trespasses unto them" (2 Cor 5:19).

Now it is observable, That Noah was a man of faith long before
this. Hence note two things.

1. That men, even of eminent faith have yet need of a continual
remembrance of the death and sufferings of Christ; yea, and that
in the most plain and easiest manner to understand.

2. They have need also, notwithstanding they have faith before, to
present themselves before God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: For
as our persons are not accepted, but in and through him, no more
are our performances; yea, though they be spiritual services or
sacrifices; it is the blood that maketh the atonement, as well
for work as persons (Lev 17:11; Heb 9:21). As he saith in another
place, I will accept you with your sweet savour, but not without it
(1 Peter 2:5; Eze 20:41). As he also said to his church in Egypt,
"When I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall
not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt"
(Exo 12:13).

"And the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse," &c. By
heart here, we may understand two things.

1. That God was altogether unfeigned in this promise. He spake
it from his very heart: which we use to count the most sincere
expressing of our mind: According to that of the prophet, "Yea, I
will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in
this land assuredly--[in truth, in stability,] with my whole heart,
and with my whole soul" (Jer 32:41). Mark, I will rejoice to do
it, I will do it assuredly, I will do it in truth, even "with my
whole heart, and with my whole soul."

2. By his saying, "In his heart," we may understand the secrecy of
his purpose; for this doctrine, Of not cursing again, it is hid
from all but those to whom it is revealed by the Spirit of God.
For this purpose, in the heart of God, is one of the depths,
or of the deep things of God, which the spirit of a man cannot
understand. "Who hath known the mind of the Lord?" None of all the
sons of men, but those that have the Holy Ghost: Therefore Paul
applieth that to himself and fellows, as that which is peculiar
to them to know, "We have the mind of Christ" (1 Cor 2:16). It is
said, that after Christ had by his parables preached his gospel to
the world, he in private "expounded all things to his disciples"
(Mark 4:34).

Hence note, That they that will hear God speak this, they must be
near his very heart. They that are in his heart, may hear it: but
to them that are without, in parables. This secret, in revelation
of the gospel, is also expressed in other terms: as, That the
Lord spake "in mine ears" (Isa 5:9), and "it was revealed in mine
ears" (Isa 22:14). And again, "Hear now this word that I speak in
thine ears" (Jer 28:7).

"I will not again curse the ground any more." These words are also
under Moses' veil; for in them is contained the sin of the world,
and damnation thereof. He said, when he was to bring the flood,
that the "earth was corrupt," and that he would "destroy the earth"
(6:11,13); but his great meaning, was, of the sinners that dwelt
therein; as the effect of that flood declared. So he saith again,
he will not bring any more a flood to destroy the earth; and that
the bow in the cloud should be a sign of peace between him and
the earth: By all which is meant in special, the men that dwell
on the earth (Psa 114:7; Deu 32:1; Jer 6:19; 22:29); and they are
called, the Ground, and the Earth, because they came from thence.
So then, there is, as it were, the foundation of all spiritual
blessedness couched under these words, "I will not curse the
ground, I will not destroy man." And that this must needs be the
meaning thereof, consider, that this promise ariseth from the
sweet savour that he smelt before in the burnt-offering; which was
a figure of Christ, who was "made a curse for us" (Gal 3:13), to
deliver us from the curse of the law; that we might through him
obtain the blessing of forgiveness of sins; to which the curse
stands directly opposite.

"I will not again curse the ground for man's sake; for the imagination
of man's heart is evil from his youth." The imagination of man's
heart was the ground of this dreadful curse; and the effect
of this curse, was, to lay them up in chains in hell: Wherefore
Peter saith, These men are "now in prison." The curse therefore,
in its most eminent extension, reached the souls of those ungodly
ones that were swept away with the flood. But it seems a strange
argument, or reason rendered of God, why again he would not curse
the ground, if it was because of the evil imagination of man's
heart, this being the only argument that prevailed with him to send
the flood. The meaning therefore is rather this, That because of
the satisfaction that Christ hath given to God for sin, therefore
he said in his heart, he would "not again curse the ground," for
the evil imagination of man; that is, he would not do it, for
want of a sacrifice that had in it a sufficient propitiation (John
3:18,19).

Hence note, That the great cause now of man's condemnation, is not
because of his inherent pollution, but because he accepteth not,
with Noah, of the satisfaction made by Christ; for to all them that
have so accepted thereof, there is now no curse nor condemnation
(Rom 8:1), though still the imagination of their heart be evil. "If
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous" (1 John 2:1).

"For the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth." These
words seem to insinuate the cause of these evil imaginations; and
that is, from the corruption of their youth. Now how soon their
youth was corrupted, David shows by these words, "I was shapen in
iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me" (Psa 51:5). Ezekiel
also shows, we were polluted in the day that we were born (Eze
16:1-8). Further, God to Moses strongly affirms it, in that he
commands, That for the firstborn, in whom the rest were included,
an offering should be offered, by that they were a month old (Exo
13:13; 34:20). God seems therefore, by this word, to look back to
the transgression of our first parents, by whom sin came into our
natures; and by so doing he not only intimateth, yea, promiseth
a pardon to personal miscarriages; but assureth us, That neither
them, nor yet our inward pollutions, shall destroy us, because of
the rest that he found before in Christ (Rom 5).

"Neither will I again smite any more every living thing, as I have
done." The creatures therefore also have some kind of benefit by
the death and blood of Christ; that is, so as to live, and have a
being; for infinite justice is so perfectly just, as that without
a sacrifice it could not have suffered the world to stand, after
sin was in the world, but must have destroyed, for the sake of
sin, the world which he had made.

For although it be foully absurd to say that beasts and fowls are
defiled with sin, as man; yet doubtless they received detriment
thereby. "The creature was made subject to vanity, by reason of him
who hath subjected the same," &c. That is, by Adam's sin. Which
vanity they also show by divers of their practise; as both in
their enmity to man, and one to another, with which they were not
created; this came by the sin of man. Now that man lives, yea, that
beasts live, it is because of the offering up of Christ: Wherefore
it is said in that of the Colossians, The gospel is "preached to
every creature"; in every creature under heaven; to wit, in that
they live and have a being (1:23).

"Neither will I again smite any more every living thing, as I have
done." These words, as I have done, doth not exempt the creature
from every judgment of God, but from this, or such as this; for we
know, that other judgments do befall ungodly men now; and if they
continue in final impenitence, they shall partake of far greater
judgments than to be drowned by the waters of a flood. "The wicked
is reserved unto judgment" (Job 21:30). Yea, the heavens and the
earth that now are, are "reserved unto fire,--and perdition of
ungodly men" (2 Peter 3:7).

Ver. 22. "While the earth remaineth, seed time and harvest, and
cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not
cease." "While the earth remaineth." These words may have respect
both to the words before, and to them that follow after. If they
respect the words before, then they are as limits to that large
promise, of not destroying the world again: not but that the day
will come, as I said, in which another general judgment, and that
too far more dreadful than this of water, will overflow the world,
and every living thing shall again be cut off from the face
of all the earth: as now by rain of water, then by rain of fire
and brimstone: Which day and sore judgment, God showed unto men,
when he burned Sodom and Gomorrah with "fire and brimstone from
heaven." But,

"While the earth remaineth," this shall not be. But in the end, then
indeed both it and "the works that are therein, shall [as Peter
saith] be burned up" (2 Peter 3:10). But so long as it remaineth,
that is, until it be overtaken with this second, and that too the
beginning of eternal judgment, no universal judgment shall overrun
the earth: For albeit that since that flood, the earth hath been
smitten with many a curse; yet it hath been but here and there, not
in every place at once. Famines, and earthquakes, and pestilences,
have been in divers places, but yet at the same time hath there
been seed time and harvest also (Mark 13:8; Luke 21:11).

"Seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter,
and day and night, shall not cease." These words were some of the
first, with that of "the bow in the cloud," that prevailed with me
to believe that the scriptures were the word of God.

For my reason tells me, they are, and have continued a true
prophecy, from the day that they were related; otherwise the world
could not have subsisted; for take away seed time and harvest,
cold and heat, &c., and an end is put to the[38] beginning of the
universe.

Besides, if these words be taken in a spiritual sense, they have also
stood true from that very day; otherwise the church had ceased to
have a being long before this: For take away seed time and harvest
from the church, with cold and heat, and day and night, and those
ordinances of heaven are taken from her, which were ordained for
her begetting and continuation. This head might with much largeness
be insisted on; but to pass it, and to come to the next chapter.

CHAPTER IX.

Ver. 1. "And God blessed Noah, and his sons, and said unto them,
Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth."

Noah having thus waded through these great temptations, and being
made also to partake of the mercy of God, in preserving and saving
him from the evil thereof, and being brought to partake of the
beginning of a new world, while the ungodly that were before the
flood were perished for their iniquity: he receiveth now from the
mouth of the Lord, before whom he walked before the flood, laws
and ordinances, as rules by which he should still govern his
life before him. But mark, Before he receiveth these rules and
commandments, he receiveth blessing from God; blessing, I say, as
that which should yet fore-fit him to do his will.

"And God blessed Noah." Blessed him with spiritual and special
grace; for without that, no man can walk, with God's acceptance
before him. He blessed him with grace suitable to the work he was
now to begin; to wit, for the replenishing and governing the new
world God had brought him to: so that Noah did not without precedent
qualifications take this work upon him. God also gave Caleb and
Joshua another spirit, and then they followed him fully. That of
David is for this remarkable, "Who am I, [said he] and what is my
people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this
sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given
thee." "O Lord our God, saith he, all this store that we have
prepared to build thee an house for thine holy name, cometh of
thine hand, and is all thine own" (1 Chron 29:10-16). So is faith,
love, strength, wisdom, sincerity, and all other good things
wherewith and by which we walk with God, worship him, and do his
will: all which is comprised in these words, "I will give them an
heart to know me, that I am the LORD: and they shall be my people,
and I will be their God; for they shall return unto me with their
whole heart" (Jer 24:7). "A new heart also will I give them" (Eze
36:25-29). And again, "I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me" (Jer 32:37-40).

"And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful,
and multiply, and replenish the earth." After he had blessed him,
then he tells him what they should do; namely, "Be fruitful, and
multiply." This he spake with respect to the seed that he and his
sons should beget, therewith to people the world; which was now
the remaining part of his work, and he had three arguments to
encourage him thereto. First, He was delivered from the wicked and
sinners of the old world: 2. He was made the heir of a new world;
and 3. Was to leave it as an heritage to his children.

This therefore should teach us, who are brought into the kingdom
of Christ, that new world that hath taken its beginning in the word
of the gospel, not to be idle, but to be fruitful, and to labour
to fill the world with a spiritual seed to God: for as Noah, so
are we made heirs of this blessed kingdom; and shall also, as that
good man, leaven, when we sleep in Jesus, this spiritual seed to
possess the kingdom after us.

Ver. 2. "And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon
every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all
that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into
your hand are they delivered." These words seem to be a promise
of what shall be a consequence of their putting into practice what
was commanded in the verse before; namely, of their being fruitful,
and of their "multiplying in the earth." Hence note, That the
faithful observation of God's word, puts majesty, and dread, and
terror upon them that do it: Therefore it is said, that when the
church is "fair as the moon, and clear as the sun, she is terrible
as an army with banners" (Cant 6:4,10). The presence of godly
Samuel made the elders of Bethlehem tremble; yea, when Elisha was
sought for by the king of Syria, he durst not engage him, but with
chariots and horses, and an heavy host (2 Kings 6:13,14). Godliness
is a wonderful thing, it commandeth reverence, and the stooping
of the spirits, even of the world of ungodly ones (Acts 5:13).

"And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast."
This is true in the letter; for because there is upon man, as man,
more of the image and similitude of God, than there is upon other
creatures; therefore the beasts, and all the creatures, are made
to stoop and fall before them; yea, though in themselves they are
mighty and fierce. Every kind [or, nature] of birds, and of serpents,
and things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed by mankind
(James 3:7).

But to allegorize the word, for by the word, ungodly men are
beasts; then, as I said before, godliness puts such a majesty and
dread upon the professors of it, that their enemies are afraid of
them; yea, even then when they rage against them, and lay heavy
afflictions upon them. It is marvellous to see in what fear the
ungodly are, even of godly men, and godliness; in that they stir
up the mighty, make edicts against them; yea, and raise up armies,
and what else can be imagined, to suppress them; while the persons
thus opposed, if you consider them as to their state and capacity
in this world; they are most inconsiderable; but as a dead dog,
or a flea (1 Sam 24:14). O but they are clothed with godliness!
The image and presence of God is upon them! This makes the beasts
of this world afraid. One of you shall chase a thousand.

"Into your hands are they delivered." That is, the beasts, birds,
and fish of the sea (as David saith) to be for the service of
man. But again, This is also true in a higher nature; for taking
these beasts, &c. for men, even they are delivered into the hand
of the church, by whose doctrine, power and faith, they are smitten
with severest judgments (2 Cor 2:15,16). Laying all that reject
them even in the depth of death, and smiting them "with all plagues
as often as they will" (Rev 11:6). The world is therefore in our
hand, and disposed of by our doctrine, by our faith and prayers,
although they think far otherwise, and shall one day feel their
judgments are according.

Ver. 3. "Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even
as the green herb have I given you all things."

From these words some would insinuate, that before the flood men
lived only upon herbs, not eating flesh; as here they have authority
granted to do: but, in mine opinion, such should be mistaken, for
this reason, if there were no other: because they offered sacrifice
before; sacrifices, I say, as types and representatives to the church,
of the death and sufferings of Christ. Now, of such sacrifices the
offerers used to eat, as is clear by the lamb of the passover, and
many other offerings: so that these words seem to be but a renewing
of their former privileges, not a granting new liberty to the
world.

"Every moving thing." This must be taken with this restriction,
That is wholesome and good for food: for by the law of nature,
nothing of that is forbidden to man, though for some significations
many such creatures were forbidden us to use for a time (Deu 14).

"Even as the green herb." For which they expressly had liberty
granted them, in the first chapter of this book (v 29). And this
liberty might afresh be here repeated, from some scruple that might
arise in Noah, &c. He remembering that the world before might, for
the abuse of the creatures of God, as well as for the abuse of his
worship, be drowned with the flood; for sometimes the abuse of
that which is lawful to one, may be a snare, abuse and stumbling
to another (1 Cor 7:1; 8).

Ver. 4. "But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof
shall ye not eat."

This law seems to be ceremonial, although given long before Moses
was; as also some sacrifices and circumcision were (John 7:22).
Wherefore we must seek for the reason of this prohibition. "Whatsoever
man [saith God] there be of the house of Israel,--that eateth any
manner of blood, I will even set my face against that soul that
eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people." Why?
"For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it
to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it
is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul. Therefore I
said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood"
(Lev 17:10-12). Again, As here the prohibition is only concerning
blood; so in another place, the word is as well against our eating
the fat; "It shall be a perpetual statute for your generations,
throughout all your dwellings, that ye neither eat fat nor blood."
And the reason rendered, is, For "all the fat is the LORD'S" (Lev
3:16,17).

So then the meaning, the spiritual meaning, seems to be this, That
forasmuch as the blood is the life, and that which maketh the
atonement; and the fat, the glory, and the Lord's; therefore they
both were to be offered to the Lord. That is, we ought always to offer
the merit of our salvation to God, by a continual acknowledgment,
that it was through the blood of Christ; and we ought always to give
him the glory thereof, and this is the fat of all our performances
(Isa 25:6). Now this is so blessed a thing, and calleth for that
grace, that every professor hath not, every one cannot ascribe
to the blood of the Lamb, the whole of his reconciliation to God;
nor offer up the fat, the glory, which is God's, to the Lord for
so great a benefit: this is the benefit of a peculiar people, even
of "the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, [or they that are
justified, or just thereby; (For so Zadok signifies)] that kept the
charge of my sanctuary, when the children of Israel went astray
from me; they shall come near to me, to minister unto me, and
they shall stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood,
saith the Lord God" (Eze 44:15).

Wherefore, for men to ascribe to their own works the merit of their
salvation, or to take the glory thereof to themselves; it is as
eating the blood and the fat themselves, and they shall be cut
off from the people of God.

Ver. 5. "And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the
hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at
the hand of every man's brother, will I require the life of man."

These words are spoken to the church, which then resided in this
family: Not but that God will avenge the blood that is wrongfully
shed, though the person murdered be most carnal and irreligious.
"A man that doeth violence to the blood of any person, shall flee
to the pit; let no man stay him" (Pro 28:17).

But I say, these words respect the church in a more special and
eminent way. "Surely [saith God] your blood of your lives will I
require." Thus also David insinuates the thing: "when he maketh
the inquisition for blood, he remembereth them: [the saints and
godly in special,] he forgetteth not the cry of the humble," the
afflicted (Psa 9:12).

"At the hand of every beast will I require it." The beasts are here
also to be taken for men, to whom they are frequently likened in
scripture; and that because they have cast off human affections;
and, like savage creatures, make a prey of those that are better
than themselves. Ignorance therefore or brutishness, O thou wicked
man! will not excuse thee in the day of judgment; all the injuries
that thou doest to the people of God, shall for certain be required
of thee.

"At the hand of man will I require it." By man here, we may
understand, such as have greater placed and shew of reason wherewith
they manage their cruelty, than those that are as the natural beast:
for all persecutors are not brutish alike; some are in words as
smooth as oil; others can shew a semblance of reason of state,
why they should see "the righteous for silver, and the poor for a
pair of shoes" (Amos 2:6). These act, to carnal reason, like men,
as Saul against David, for the safety of his kingdom; but these
must give an account of their cruelty, for blood is in their hands.

"At the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man."
This word brother may reach to all the apostatized hypocrites that
forsake or betray the godly, for brother shall betray the brother
to death (Matt 10:21). Such are spoken of in Isaiah, "Your brethren
that hated you, [saith God,] and that cast you out for my name's
sake, said, Let the LORD be glorified: but he shall appear to your
joy, and they shall be ashamed" (Isa 65:5). So that let them be
as vile as the brute, or as reasonable in appearance as men, or
as near in relation as a brother; neither their ignorance, nor
their reason, nor their relation to the saints, shall secure them
from the stroke of the judgment of God. Ver. 6. "Whoso sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of
God made he man."

In these words we have both a threatening and a command; and the
same words carry both: "By man shall his blood be shed," there is
the threatening; "By man shall his blood be shed," there is the
command. For as they threaten, so they instruct us, that he is
worthy of the loss of his own blood, that doth wickedly shed the
blood of another (Matt 26:52; Rev 13:10). Blood for blood, equal
measure: As he also saith elsewhere, An eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth (Exo 21:24), wound for wound, burning for burning (Lev
24:20; Deu 19:21).

"For in the image of God made he man." This seems as the reason
of this equal law; because no man can slay his neighbour, but he
striketh at the image of God. It is counted a heinous crime for
a man to run his sword at the picture of a king, how much more to
shed the blood of the image of God? "He that mocketh, or oppresseth,
the poor reproacheth his Maker; but he that honoureth him, hath
mercy on the poor" (Pro 14:31; 17:5). And if so, how much more do
they reproach, yea, despise and abhor their Maker, that slay and
murder his image! But most of all those do prove themselves the
enemies of God, that make the holiness, the goodness, the religion
and sobriety that is found in the people of God, the object of their
wrath and hellish cruelty. Hence murder is, in the New Testament,
imputed to that man that hated holy and godly man: "He that hateth
his brother, is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer hath
eternal life abiding in him" (1 John 3:15).

Ver. 7l. "And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth
abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein." Thus he doubleth
the blessing and command, of multiplying and increasing the church
in the earth, for that is the delight of God, and of Christ.

Ver. 8, 9. "And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him,
saying, And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with
your seed after you."

God having thus blessed them, and given them laws and judgments
to walk by, for the further confirmation of their hope in God, he
propoundeth to them the immutability of his mind, by the establishing
of his covenant with them; for a covenant is that, which not only
concludeth the matter concerned between the persons themselves;
but it provideth remedy against after temptations, and fears, and
mistrusts, as to the faithful performance of that which is spoken
of. As Laban said to Jacob, "Now therefore [said he] come thou,
let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness
between me and thee" (Gen 31:44). Thus also the apostle insinuates;
where making mention of the promise and oath of God, he saith, this
promise and oath are both immutable, that "we might have a strong
consolation, [or always ground for great rejoicing] who have fled
for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us" (Heb 6:18).

This covenant therefore, it was for the encouragement of Noah and
his sons, that they might walk before God without fear. Yea, it
was to maintain their hope in his promise of forgiveness, though
they should find their after-performances mixed with infirmities;
for so he had told them before, namely, "That he would not again
destroy the earth for man's sake, albeit the imagination of man's
heart be evil from his youth. I will establish my covenant with
you, and with your seed after you."

Ver. 10. "And with every living creature that is with you: of the
fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you;
from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth."
These words respect the whole creation (see chapter 8); for all
the things in the world, devils only excepted, have a benefit
by this covenant of God. And hence it is, that not man only, but
"every thing that hath breath," is commanded to "praise the Lord"
(Psa 150:6): But observe it; as for the sin of man, they before
were destroyed by the flood; so now by reason of the mercy of
God to man, they are spared, and partake of mercy also. This is
intimated by these words: "Every creature that is with you; every
beast of the earth with you."

Ver. 11. "And I will establish my covenant with you, neither shall
all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither
shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth."

This is the sum of the covenant, as it respecteth the letter, and
the type, and the whole creation in general. But yet as to the
spirit and gospel of it, the Holy Ghost must needs have a further
reach, an intention of more glorious things, as may further be
shewed anon.

"And I will establish my covenant with you." For you that are men,
and especially the members of the church, have the most peculiar
share therein.

"Neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of
a flood." For because of my covenant which I establish with you,
I will spare them also, and give them the taste of my mercy and
goodness.

"Neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth."
This covenant therefore, is not of that nature as the covenant
was which was made with Adam, to wit, a covenant of works, as the
only conditions of life; for by that was the ground, for man's
sin, accursed, accursed, and accursed again. But now the Lord goeth
another way, the way of grace, and forgiveness of sins: Wherefore
now, not the curse, but the mercy of God, comes in on the back and
neck of sin, still sparing and forgiving man, the great transgressor,
and the beast, &c. and the earth, for the sake of him.

Ver. 12, 13. "And God said, This is the token of the covenant which
I make between me and you and every living creature that is with
you, for perpetual generations. I do set my bow in the cloud, and
it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and all the earth."

So then, the way to find out the covenant, what that is, it is to
see if we can find out this token of it; to wit, the BOW, of which
the rainbow is but a type. I find then by the scriptures, where
this BOW is mystically spoken of, that the Lord Jesus Christ
himself is encompassed with the bow. The first is this:

"And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness
of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the
likeness of the throne was the likeness, as the appearance of
a man above upon it. And I saw, as the colour of amber, as the
appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of
his loins even upward, and from the appearance of his loins even
downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had
brightness round about. As the appearance of the bow that is in the
cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness
round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory
of the LORD" (Eze 1:26-28), the man, the Lord's Christ, &c.

The second scripture is this. "I was in the Spirit: and, behold a
throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne. And he that sat
was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone: and there was
a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald"
(Rev 4:2,3). In these two texts there is mention of the rainbow,
that was, not to be the covenant, but the token or sign thereof.
Now then the covenant itself must needs be the man that was set
in the midst of the bow upon the throne; for so he saith by the
prophet, "I the LORD have called thee in righteousness, and will
hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant
of the people" (Isa 42:6). The covenant therefore is Jesus Christ
the Saviour, whom the bow in the clouds was a sign or a token of.
So then the sum of the text is this, That God, for the sake of
the Lord Jesus Christ, will not again all the days of the earth,
bring an universal judgment upon the creature, as in the days of
Noah, and of the old world he did; for Christ by the worth of his
blood and righteousness hath pacified the justice of the law for
sin. So then the whole universe standeth not upon a bottom of its
own, but by the word and power of Christ (Heb 1:2,3). "The earth
[said he] and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear
up the pillars of it" (Psa 75:3).

Quest. But how must Christ be reckoned of God, when he maketh him
the poize against all the sin of the world.

The prophet tells us thus: He shall be the covenant of the people,
or he shall be accounted the conditions and worth of the world; He
shall be the covenant, or works, or righteousness of the people;
for, He as the high-priest under the law, is set for the people
to Godward; that is, he standeth always in the presence of God,
as the complete obedience of the people. So then, so long as the
Lord Christ bears up his mediatorship, God in justice will neither
destroy the world, nor the things that are therein.

In this covenant therefore, the justice as well as the mercy of God
is displayed in its perfection, inasmuch as without the perfection
of the mediator Christ, the world could not be saved from judgment.

Ver. 14. "And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the
earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud."

By these words the Lord looks back to the flood that before had
drowned the earth; for in these clouds there was no bow, no token
of Christ, or of the mercy of God. But now, saith God, I will do
far otherwise; from henceforth when I bring a cloud, and there
be showers of rain on the earth, these clouds shall not be as the
other. But "my bow shall be therein."

The cloud then that here is spoken of, must be understood of the
judgment of God for sin, like those before, and at the overthrow of
the world; only with this difference, they were clouds, judgments
without mercy, but these judgments mixed therewith; and often the
clouds are thus to be understood. Job when he curseth his day,
saith, "Let a cloud dwell upon it" (3:5). So the judgments of God
upon Zion, are called the covering of a cloud (Lam 2:1). So in Joel
also, to the darkness of clouds, are the judgments of the church
compared (2:2); yea, that pillar that went before the children of
Israel, it being a judgment to the people of Egypt, goes under this
epithet, as a term most fit to express this judgment by, "it was
a cloud and darkness to them" (Exo 14:20).

And now to the cloud in hand, the cloud in which is the bow, the
cloud of rain, although by the mercy and grace of God it is so
great a blessing as it is, yet it sometimes becomes a judgment,
it comes for correction, as a rod to afflict the inhabitants of
the world withal (Job 37:13). Thus it was in the days of Ezra,
and very often both before and since (10:12-14).

"The bow shall be seen in the cloud." This is the mercy of God to
the world, and that by which it hath been hitherto preserved; "The
bow shall be seen in the cloud." You know I told you of the bow
before, that it was a sign or token of the covenant of God with
the world, and that the covenant itself was Christ, as given of
God unto us, with all his good conditions, merit, and worth. So
then, in that, God "set this bow in the cloud," and especially
in the clouds that he sends for judgment, he would have the world
remember, that there comes no judgment as yet on the world, but
it is mixed with, or poized by the mercy of God in Christ.

"The bow shall be seen in the cloud." This may respect God, or the
world, that is, the seeing of the bow in the cloud; if it respect
God, then it tells us he in judgment will remember mercy; if it
respect the world, then it admonisheth us not to despond, or sink
in despair under the greatest judgment of God, for the bow, the
token of his covenant, is seen in the judgments that he executeth.

When the vision of the ruin of Jerusalem was revealed to the prophet
Ezekiel, he saw that yet Christ sat under the bow (1:28).

When antichrist was to come against the saints of God, the commission
came from Christ, as he sat "under the bow" (Rev 4:3). This John
did see and relate, of which we should take special notice: for
by this token God would have us to know that these clouds, though
they come for correction, yet not to destroy the church. My bow
shall be seen in the cloud.

Ver. 15. "And I will remember my covenant, which is between me and
you, and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall
no more become a flood to destroy all flesh."

"And I will remember my covenant." Much like this is that of the
Lord to Israel, when they are under all, or any of those forty
judgments mentioned (Lev 26). If they shall confess their iniquity,
[saith he,] and the iniquity of their fathers, &c., "Then will I
remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac,
and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will
remember the land" (Lev 26:40-42). His usual way in other sayings
is, to begin with Abraham, but here he ends with him; and the reason
is, because there, as it were, the great promise of the Messiah
to that people began, "Saying, in thy seed shall all nations be
blessed."

"And I will remember my covenant which is between me and you." We
read not here of any compact or agreement between Noah and God
Almighty; wherefore such conditions and compacts could not be
the terms between him and us. What then? why that covenant that
he calls his, which is his gift to us, "I will give thee for a
covenant," this is the covenant which is between God and us: "There
is one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus." This then is the reason why all the waters, why all the
judgments of God, and why all the sins that have provoked those
judgments, cannot become a flood to destroy all flesh.

Ver. 16. "And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon
it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and
every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth."

"And the bow shall be in the cloud." this is a kind of a repetition;
for this he had told us before, saying, "I do set my bow in the
cloud," and "the bow shall be seen in the cloud": which repetition
is very needful, for it is hard for us to believe that Christ
and grace are wrapped up in the judgments of God (1 Peter 1:12).
Wherefore it had need be attested twice and thrice. "To write the
same things to you," saith Paul, "to me indeed is not grievous,
but for you it is safe"(Phil 3:1).

"And I will look upon." A familiar expression, and suited to our
capacity, and spoken to prevent a further ground of mistrust; much
like to that of God, when he was to send the plague upon Egypt:

"The blood, saith God, [of the Lamb,] shall be to you for a token
upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood I will pass
over you, and the plague shall not be upon you, to destroy you,
when I smite the land of Egypt" (Exo 12:13).

"And I will look upon it that I may remember." Not that God is
forgetful, "He is ever mindful of his covenant." But such expressions
are used to shew and persuade us that the whole heart and delight
of God is in it. "That I may remember the everlasting covenant."
This word covenant is also the sixth repetition thereof; my
covenant, the covenant, a covenant, and the everlasting covenant.
O how fain would God beat it into the heads of the world, that he
hath for men a covenant of grace.

"The everlasting covenant." Because the parties on both sides are
faithful, perfect, and true; the Father being the one, and the Son
of his love the other; for this covenant, as I said before, is
not a compact and agreement betwixt God and the world, but his
Son, as his gift to men, is set for them to Godward (Zech 9:11).
So that what conditions there are, they are perfectly found in
Christ, by whose blood the covenant is sealed and established,
and indeed becomes everlasting, hence it is called "the blood of
the everlasting covenant" (Heb 13:20). And again, the New Testament
is said to be in this blood. Besides, the promises are all in
Christ, I mean the promises of this covenant; in him they are yea,
and in him amen, to the glory of God the Father: now they being
all in him, and yea and amen no where else, the covenant itself
must needs be of pure grace and mercy, and the bow in the cloud,
not qualifications in us, [but] the proper token of this covenant.

Ver. 17. "And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant,
which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon
the earth."

Behold a repetition of all things that were essential either to the
covenant itself, or to our faith therein, the making of the covenant,
the looking on the covenant, and the token of the covenant; how
often are they mentioned, that we might be more fully convinced of
the unchangeable nature of it. As Joseph said unto Pharaoh, "For
that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice, it is because the
thing is established by God" (Gen 41:32).

"And God said unto Noah." Where God loveth, he delighteth to apply
himself to such, in a more than general way; he singleth out the
person, Noah, Abraham, and the like. "I know thee by name," saith
he to Moses, and "thou hast found grace in my sight."

"This is the token of the covenant." It still wants beating into
people's heads, where they should look for the covenant itself,
to wit, the throne which the rainbow compasseth round about; for
that is the token of the presence of the Messias, and thither
we are to look for salvation from all plagues, and from all the
judgments that are due to sin: The Lord for Christ's sake forgave
you, this is the token of the covenant.

"Of the covenant which I have established."

This word "I," as also hinted before, doth intimate that this covenant
is the covenant of grace and mercy, for a covenant of works cannot
be established; that is, settled between God and men, before
both parties have either by sureties, or performance ratified and
confirmed the same. Indeed it may be so established, as that God
will appoint no other; but to be so established, as to give us the
fruits thereof, that must be the effects of his being well pleased
with the conditions of those concerned in the making thereof. But
that is not the world, but the Son of God, and therefore it is called
his covenant, and he "as given to us of God," is so reckoned our
condition and worth (Zech 9:11).

"Which I have established." To wit, upon better promises than
duties purely commanded, or than the obedience of all the angels
in heaven. I have established it in the truth and faithfulness, in
the merit and worth of the blood of my Son, of whom the rainbow
that you see in the cloud is a token.

Ver. 18. "And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were
Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan."

By these words Moses is returned again to the history of Noah.
"And the sons of Noah that went forth of the ark." If these words,
"that went forth of the ark," bear the emphasis of this part of the
verse, then it may seem that Noah had more children than these;
but they were not accounted of; for they being ungodly, as the rest
of the world, they perished with them in their ungodliness. These
only went in, and came out of the ark with him;[39] to wit,

"Shem, and Ham, and Japheth." The names thus placed are not according
to their birth; for Japheth was the elder, Ham the younger, and
Shem the middlemost of the two.

Shem therefore takes the place, because of his eminency in godliness
(9:24); also, because from him went the line up to Christ (10:2).
For which cause also the family of the sons of Judah, though he
was but the fourth son of Israel, was reckoned before the family
of Reuben, Jacob's first born; or before the rest of the sons of
his brethren (1 Chron 2:3). Sometimes persons take their place in
genealogy, from the fore-sight of the mightiness of their offspring.
Thus was Ephraim placed before Manasseh; for "truly [said Jacob]
his younger brother shall be greater than he" (Gen 43:17-20). And
he set Ephraim before Manasseh.

Ham is the next in order; not for the sake of his birthright, or
because he was much, if anything, now for godliness; but for that
he was the next to be eminent in his offspring, for opposing and
fighting against the same.

Shem and Ham therefore the two heads, or chief, from whence sprang
good and evil men, by way of eminency. "Ham is the father of
Canaan," or of the Canaanites, the people of God's curse, whom the
sons of Shem who afterwards sprang from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
were to cut off from the earth, for their most high abominations.

Japheth comes in, in the first place, as one that at present was
least concerned either in the mercy or displeasure of God; being
neither, in his offspring, to be devoutly religious, nor yet
incorrigibly wicked, though afterwards he was to be persuaded to
dwell in the tents of Shem.

Ver. 19. "These are the three sons of Noah; and of them was the
whole earth overspread."

Thus though Noah's beginning was small, his latter end did greatly
increase.

Ver. 20, 21. "And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted
a vineyard:--And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he
was uncovered within his tent."

This is the blot in this good man's scutcheon; and a strange blot
it is, that such an one as Noah should be thus overtaken with
evil! One would have thought that Moses should now have began
with a relation of some eminent virtues, and honourable actions
of Noah, since now he was saved from the death that overtook
the whole world, and was delivered, both he and his children, to
possess the whole earth himself. Indeed, he stepped from the earth
to the altar; as Israel of old did sing on the shore of the red
Sea: But, as they, he soon forgat; he rendered evil to God for
good.[40]

Neither is Noah alone in this matter: Lot also being delivered from
that fire from heaven that burnt up Sodom and Gomorrah, falls soon
after into lewdness with the children of his body, and begetteth
his own two daughters with child (Gen 19:30-36).

Gideon also, after he was delivered out of the hands of his enemies,
took that very gold which God had given him, as the spoil of them
that hated him, and made himself idols therewith (Judg 8:24-27).
What shall I say of David? and of Solomon also, who after he had
been twenty years at work for the service of the true God, both in
building and preparing for his worship, and in writing of Proverbs
by divine inspiration; did, after this, make temples for idols;
yea, almost for the gods of all countries? Yea, he did it when
he was old, when he should have been preparing for his grave, and
for eternity. "It came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his
wives turned away his heart after other gods:--For Solomon went
after Ashtoreth, the goddess of the Zidonians; and after Milcom,
the abomination of the Ammonites.--He did also build an high place
for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before
Jerusalem; and for Molech, the abomination of the children of
Ammon. And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt
incense and sacrificed unto their gods" (1 Kings 11:4-8).

All these sins were sins against mercies; yea, and doubtless against
covenants, and the most solemn resolutions to the contrary. For
who can imagine, but that when Noah was tossed with the flood,
and Lot within the scent and smell of the fire and brimstone that
burnt down Sodom, with his sons, and his daughters; and Gideon,
when so fiercely engaged with so great an enemy, and delivered by
so strange a hand; should in the most solemn manner both promise and
vow to God. But behold! now they in truth are delivered and saved,
they recompense all with sin. Lord, what is man! "How--abominable
and filthy is man, which drinketh iniquity like water" (Job 15:16).
Let these things learn us to cease from man, "whose breath is in
his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of?" (Isa 2:22).
Indeed, it is a vain thing to build our faith upon the most godly
man in the world, because he is subject to err; yea, far better
than He, was so.

If Noah, and Lot, and Gideon, and David, and Solomon, who wanted
not matter from arguments, and that of the strongest kind; as
arguments that are drawn from mercy and goodness be, to engage to
holiness, and the fear of God; yet after all, did so foully fall,
as we see: let us admire grace, that any stand; let the strongest
fear, lest he fearfully fall; and let no man but Jesus Christ himself
be the absolute platform and pattern of faith and holiness. As the
prophet saith, "Let us cease from man." But to return:

"And Noah began to be an husbandman." This trade he took up for
want of better employment; or rather, in mine opinion, from some
liberty he took to himself, to be remiss in his care and work, as
a preacher. For seeing the church was now at rest, and having the
world before them, they still retaining outward sobriety, poor
Noah, good man, now might think with himself, "I need not now be
so diligent, watchful and painful in my ministry as formerly; the
church is but small, without opposition, and also well settled in
the truth; I may now take to myself a little time to tamper with
worldly things." So he makes an essay upon husbandry. "He began
to be an husbandman." Ha, Noah! it was better with thee when thou
wast better employed! Yea, it was better with thee, when a world
of ungodly men set themselves against thee! Yea, when every day
thy life was in danger to be destroyed by the giants, against whom
thou wast a preacher above a hundred years! For then thou didst
walk with God; Then thou wast better than all the world; but now
thou art in the relapse!

Hence note, That though the days of affliction, of temptation and
distress, are harsh to flesh and blood; yet they are not half so
dangerous as are the days of peace and liberty. Wherefore Moses
pre-admonished Israel, That when they had received the land of
Canaan, and had herds, and silver and gold in abundance, that then
their heart be not lifted up to forget the Lord their God. Jesurun
kicked when he was fat. O! When provender pricks[41] us, we are
apt to be as the horse or mule, that is without understanding (Deu
8:10-15).

"He planted a vineyard: and he drank of the wine, and was drunken."
Although in the course of godliness, many men have but a speculative
knowledge of things; yet it is not so in the ways of this world
and sin, the practical part of these things are lived in by all
the world. They are sinners indeed, "He drank of the wine."

"He drank of the wine, and was drunken." The Holy Ghost, when it
hath to do with sin, it loveth to give it its own name: drunkenness
must be drunkenness, murder must be murder, and adultery must bear
its own name. Nay, it is neither the goodness of the man, nor his
being in favour with God, that will cause him to lessen or mince
his sin. Noah was drunken; Lot lay with his daughters; David killed
Uriah; Peter cursed and swore in the garden, and also dissembled
at Antioch. But this is not recorded, to the intent that the name
of these godly should rot or stink: but to shew, that the best
men are nothing without grace; and, "that he that standeth, should
not be high minded, but fear." Yea, they are also recorded, for the
support of the tempted, who when they are fallen, are oft raised
up by considering the infirmities of others. "Whatsoever things
were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we
through patience, and comfort of the scriptures might have hope"
(Rom 15:4).

"And he was uncovered within his tent." That is, he lay like a
drunken man, that regarded not who saw his shame. Hence note, how
beastly a sin drunkenness is; it bereaveth a man of consideration,
and civil behaviour; it makes him as brutish and shameless as a
beast; yea, it discovereth his nakedness to all that behold.

"And he was uncovered." That is, lay naked, Behold ye now, that
a little of the fruit of the vine, lays gravity, grey hairs, and
a man that for hundreds of years was a lover of faith, holiness,
goodness, sobriety, and all righteousness; shamelessly, as the
object to the eye of the wicked, with his nakedness in his tent.

"He was uncovered within his tent." The best place of retirement
he had, but it could not hide him from the eye of the ungodly; it
is not therefore thy secret chamber, nor thy lurking in holes,
that will hide thee from the eye of the reproacher: nothing can
do this but righteousness, goodness, sobriety and faithfulness to
God; this will hide thee; these are the garments, which, if they
be on thee, will keep thee, that the shame of thy nakedness do
not appear (Rev 16:15).

Ver. 22. "And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his
father, and told his two brethren without."

Ham was the unsanctified one, the father of the children of the
curse of God. He saw the nakedness of his father, and he blazed
abroad the matter. Hence note, That the wicked and ungodly man,
is he that doth watch for the infirmities of the godly: as David
says, They watched for my halting. Indeed, they know not else how
to justify their own ungodliness; but this, instead of excusing
them of their wickedness, doth but justify the word against them;
for by this they prove themselves graceless, and men that watch
for iniquity. "Let them not say in their hears [said David] Ah!
so would we have it" (Psa 35:25). Ammon said, "Aha! against the
sanctuary when it was profaned; and against the land of Israel
when it was desolate, and against the house of Judah when it went
into captivity" (Eze 25:3). The enmity that is in the hearts of
ungodly men, will not suffer them to do otherwise; when they see
evil befall the saint, they rejoice and skip for joy (Eze 26:2;
36:2).

"He saw the nakedness of his father." Hence note, That saints can
rarely slip, but the eyes of the Canaanites will see them. This
should make us walk in the world with jealous eyes, with eyes that
look round about, not only to what we are and do, but also, how
what we do is[42] resented in the world (Gen 13:7). Abraham was
good at this, and so was Isaac and Jacob (34:30); for they tendered
more the honour and glory of God, than they minded their own
concerns.

"He saw the nakedness of his father." Who was the nearest and dearest
relation he had in the world; yet neither relation nor kin, nor
all the good that his father had done him, could keep his polluted
lips from declaring his father's follies, but out they must go;
the sin of his own defiled heart must take place of the fifth
commandment, and must rather solace itself in rejoicing in his
father's iniquity, than in covering his father's nakedness. Wicked
men regard not kindred; and no marvel, for they love not godliness.
He that loveth not God, loveth not his brother, or father: nay,
he "wrongeth his own soul" (Pro 8:36).

"And told his two brethren without." He told them, that is, mockingly,
reflecting not only upon Noah but also upon his brethren; to all
of whom himself was far inferior, both as to grace and humanity.

Ver. 23. "And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon
both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness
of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not
their father's nakedness."

Shem and Japheth did it: This is recorded for the renown of these,
as the action of Ham is for his perpetual infamy.

They "took a garment, and went backward, and covered their father,
and saw not his nakedness." Love will attempt to do that with
difficulty, that it cannot accomplish otherwise. I think it might
be from this action, that the wise man gathereth his proverb from.
"Hatred stirreth up strifes; but love covereth all sins" (Pro 10:12).
Indeed, Ham would fain have made variance between his father and
his brethren, by presenting the folly of the one, to the shame and
provocation of the other. But Shem, and his brother Japheth, they
took the course to prevent it; they covered their father's nakedness.

Ver. 24. "And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger
son had done unto him."

By these words more is implied than expressed; for this awaking of
Noah, not only informeth us of natural awaking from sleep, but of
his spiritual awaking from his sin. He awoke from his wine. As
"Ely said to Hannah, How long wilt thou be drunken? Put away thy
wine from thee" (1 Sam 1:14). By which words he exhorteth to
repentance. It is said of Nabal, That his wine went from him, as
many men's sins forsake them, because they are decayed, and want
strength and opportunity to perform them. Now this may be done,
where the heart remaineth yet unsanctified: but Noah awoke from
his wine, put it away, or, repented him of the evil of his doing.
"A just man falleth seven times, and riseth up again: but the
wicked shall fall into mischief" (Pro 24:16). Wherefore they have
cause to say to all the Hams in the world, "Rejoice not against
me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise" (Micah 7:8); but
your fall, is a fall into mischief.

"He knew what his younger son had done unto him." Whether this was
by revelation from heaven, or through the information of Japheth
and Shem, I determine not; but so it was, that the good man had
understanding thereof: which might be requisite upon a double
account; not only that he might now be ashamed thereof; but take
notice, that he had caused the enemies of God to reproach; for
this sinks deep into a good man's heart, and afflicteth him so
much the more.

Ver. 25. "And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants
shall he be unto his brethren."

By these words one would think that Canaan, the grand-child of
Noah, was the first that discovered his nakedness; but of this I
am uncertain: I rather think that Noah, in a spirit of prophecy,
determined the destruction of Ham's posterity, from the prodigiousness
of his wicked action, and of his name, which signifieth indignation,
or heat; for names of old were ofttimes given according to the
nature and destiny of the persons concerned. "Is not he rightly
called Jacob?" (Gen 27:36). And again, "As his name is, so is he"
(1 Sam 25:25). Besides, by this act did Ham declare himself void
of the grace of God; for he that rejoiceth in iniquity, or that
maketh a mock, as being secretly pleased with or at the infirmities
of the godly, he is declared already, by the Spirit of God, to be
nothing (1 Cor 13).

"A servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren." This was
accomplished when Israel took the land of Canaan, and made the
offspring of this same Ham, even so many as escaped the edge of
the sword, to be captives and bondsmen, and tributers unto them.

Hence note, that the censures of good men are dreadful, and not
lightly to be passed over, whether they prophesy of evil or good;
because they speak in judgment, and according to the tenor of the
word of God.

Ver. 26. "And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan
shall be his servant."

Shem seems by this to be the first in that action of love to his
father: and that Japheth did help through his persuasion; for Shem
is blessed in a special manner, and Canaan is made his servant.

Hence note, That forwardness in things that are good, is a blessed
sign that the Lord is our God: Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. It
is said of Hananiah, That "he was a faithful man, and feared God
above many" (Neh 7:2). Now such men are provocations to good, as
I doubt not but Shem's was to Japheth: As Paul saith of some, "Your
zeal hath provoked very many" (2 Cor 9:2).

Ver. 27. "God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the
tents of Shem."

In the margin, it is "God shall persuade": And it looks like
a confirmation of what I said before, and is a prophecy of that
requital of love that God should one day give his posterity, for his
kindness to Noah his father. As if Noah had said, "Well, Japheth,
thou wast soon persuaded by Shem to shew kindness to me thy father,
and the Lord shall hereafter persuade thy posterity to trust in
the God of Shem."

"God shall enlarge." This may respect liberty of soul, or how great
the church of the Gentiles should be; for Japheth was the father
of the Gentiles (Gen 10:5).

If it respect the fist, then it shows that sin is as fetters and
chains that holds souls in captivity and thraldom. And hence, when
Christ doth come in the gospel, it is "to preach deliverance to
the captives,--and to set at liberty them that are bruised" (Luke
4:18).

"God shall persuade." That is, God shall enlarge him by persuasion;
for the gospel knows no other compulsion, but to force by
argumentation. Them therefore that God brings into the tents,
or churches of Christ, they by the gospel are enlarged form the
bondage and thraldom of the devil, and persuaded also to embrace
his grace to salvation.

Ver. 28. "And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty
years."

He lived therefore to see Abraham fifty and eight years old: He
lived also to see the foundation of Babel laid; nay, the top stone
thereof: and also the confusion of tongues. He lived to see of the
fruit of his loins, mighty kings and princes. But in all this time
he lived not to do one work that the Holy Ghost thought worthy to
record for the savour of his name, or the edification and benefit
of his church, save only, That he died at nine hundred and fifty
years; so great a breach did this drunkenness make upon his spirit.

Ver. 29. "So all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty
years: and he died."

CHAPTER X.

Ver. 1. "Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem,
Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood."

Having thus passed over the flood, with what Noah and his sons
did after; we now come to the second plantation of the world, to
wit, by the three sons of Noah; for by these three was the world
replenished after the flood. Shem was the father of the Jews;
Ham the father of the Canaanites; and Japheth, the father of the
Gentiles. So then, of Shem came the then present visible church;
of Ham the opposers and enemies of it; but of Japheth came those
that should be received into the church afterwards; as also
abundance of the haters of the Lord.

Ver. 2. "The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and
Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras."

Gomer, a consumer; Magog, covering, or melting; Madai, measuring,
or judging; Javan, making sad; Tubal, born, brought, or worldly;
Meshech, prolonging; Tiras, a destroyer; these are the English of
their names.

Gomer, and Magog, and Meshech, and Tubal, are the great persecutors of
the church in the latter days (Eze 38:2). They shall be persecuted
then by consumers, melters, and men of this world (Rev 20:8).
Madai, and Javan, (as some say,) were the fathers of the Medes and
Greeks. These therefore did sometimes help, and not always hinder
the church.

Ver. 3, 4. "And the sons of Gomer; Askenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim."

Riphath, medicine, or release; Elishah, the Lamb of God; Dodanim,
beloved. Either these names were given them by way of prophecy;
implying, that of their seed should arise many Gentile churches;
or to show us, that when men, as their fathers, have left or lost
the power of godliness, yet something of the notion they may yet
retain (Isa 60:9).

Ver. 5. "By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their
lands, every one after his tongue, after their families, in their
nations."

But this must be understood to be after the building of, and
confusion at Babel; for before they had all but one tongue; and
besides, they kept all together (11:1,2).

Ver. 6. "And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and
Canaan."

Cush, black. Of Ham and Mizraim came the Ethiopians, or blackamoor
(Psa 105:23): The land of Ham was the country about Egypt; wherefore
Israel was first afflicted by them.

Ver. 7. "And the sons of Cush; Seba and Havilah, and Sabtah, and
Raamah, and Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba and Dedan."

Seba and Sheba, sometimes look well upon the church; but when they
did not, God gave them for her ransom (Psa 72:10; Isa 43:3).

Ver. 8. "And Cush begat Nimrod: [or the rebellious one;] he began
to be a mighty one in the earth."

The begetting of Nimrod, is accounted a thing that is over and
above, and is laid by the Holy Ghost as a blot upon Cush for ever;
for when men would vilify, they used to say, Thou art the son of
the rebellious, the son of a murderer. So again, He that begetteth
Solomon's fool, (or, wicked one) he begetteth him to his own shame
(Prov 17:21).

"Cush begat Nimrod." So then, the curse came betimes upon the sons
of Ham; for he was the father of Cush. For the curse, as it were,
begins in rebellion, and a rebellious one was Nimrod, both by name
and nature.

"He began to be a mighty one in the earth." I am apt to think he
was the first that in this new world sought after absolute monarchy.

"He began to be a mighty one in the earth," (or, among the children
of men). I suppose him to be a giant; not only in person, but
in disposition; and so, through the pride of his countenance, did
scorn that others, or any, should be his equal; nay, could not be
content, till all made obeisance to him. He therefore would needs
be the author and master of what religion he pleased; and would
also subject the rest of his brethren thereto, by what ways his
lusts thought best. Wherefore here began a fresh persecution.
THAT sin therefore which the other world was drowned for was again
revived by this cursed man, even to lord it over the sons of God,
and to enforce idolatry and superstition upon them; and hence he
is called "the mighty hunter."

Ver. 9. "He was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is
said, even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD."

He was a mighty hunter. That is, a persecutor: Wherefore Saul's
persecuting of David is compared to hunting (1 Sam 26:20): and so
is the persecution of others (Lam 4:18). They hunt every man his
brother with a net (Micah 7:2): and it may well be compared thereto;
of the dog or lion that hunteth, is void of bowels and pity; and
if they can but satisfy their doggish and lionish nature, they care
neither for innocence, nor goodness, nor life of that they pursue
(1 Sam 24:11). The life, the blood, the extirpation of the contrary
party, is the end of their course of hunting (Eze 13:18,22).[43]

"He was a mighty hunter." As it is said of Jabin, "He mightily
oppressed Israel twenty years"; that is, he did it exceedingly;
he went beyond others; he was more cruel and barbarous; he was
a mighty hunter. Wherefore the children of blessed Shem, by this
monster, had sore affliction (Judg 4:2,3). Noah therefore lived
to see Nimrod, the mighty one, make havock of the children of his
bowels, to his no little grief and compunction of spirit.

"He was a mighty hunter before the LORD"; or, in the presence of
the Lord; or, in defiance to him. This shows, That the hand of
God was stretched forth against his work; as also it was against
Jeroboam's, by that man of God that from Judah went down to prophesy
against him; but he abode obdurate and hard; he regarded not the
Lord, nor the operation of his hands (1 Kings 13:1-3). As he also
saith in another place of the cursed brood of Antichrist, "When
they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded" (Joel 2:8).
Let them do things never so much against the plain text, they feel
not the wounds of conscience; but this is a sore judgment, and that
under which this hunter was; and therefore the presence and hand
of God would not break him off, nor hinder his hunting of souls.
But even before the face of the keeper of the godly, would Nimrod,
the rebel, hunt for their precious life to destroy it.

Wherefore it is said, even as Nimrod, the mighty hunter, before
the Lord. These words, as it seems, was the proverb that went of
him among the godly in after generations; for he had so left his
marks in the sides of the church, that she could not quickly forget
him. Wherefore, when at any time there arose another that showed
cruelty to the ways of God, he was presently compared to Nimrod,
that "hunted before the Lord." Nimrod therefore was rebellious
to a proverb: And as it is said of Ahab, so might it be said
of him, "There was none like" Nimrod, "which did sell himself to
work wickedness in the sight of, [or, before] the LORD" (1 Kings
21:25).[44]

Ver. 10. "And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech,
and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar."

By these words, as I suppose, are those in the chapter that followeth
expounded: Where it says, "Let us build us a city, and a tower";
for this work was chiefly the invention of Nimrod, who, with his
wicked council, contrived this work; and as one that had made
himself head of the people, he enjoined them to set to the work.

"And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel." Babel therefore was
the first great seat of oppressors after the flood; whose situation
was in the land of Shinar, in that land which is now called Babylon.
By this we may also gather, by whom our mystical Babel was builded;
to wit, by those that rebelled (as Nimrod) from the simplicity
of the gospel of Christ; for the builders, especially the chief,
have a semblance one of another. It was even such as came of the
seed of the godly, as these did of blessed Noah; who, in time,
apostatizing from the word, and desiring mastership over their
brethren; they, as lords, fomented their own conceptions, and then
enjoined the people to build. As Rehoboam forsook the counsel
of the ancients, that stood before his father Solomon; so these
have forsaken the counsel of the old men, the apostles that stood
before Jesus Christ; and hearkening to the counsel of a younger
sort of wanters of their grace and wisdom, they imagine and build
a Babel.[45]

Ver. 11, 12. "Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh,
and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen, between Nineveh, and
Calah: The same is a great city."

Nimrod having began to exalt himself; others, that were big
with desires of ostentation, did soon follow his example, making
themselves captains and heads of the people, and built them strong
holds for the supportation of their glory. But they did it, as I
said, by Nimrod's example; wherefore it is said they went "out of
that land." Just thus it was at the beginning of mystical Babel:
First the tyranny began at Babel itself, where the usurper was
seen to sit in his glory, before whose face the world did tremble.
Now other inferior persons, inferior, I say, in power, but not
in pride, having desire to be lords, as Nimrod himself, they will
also go build them cities; by which means Nimrod's invention could
not be kept at Rome, but hath spread itself in many and mighty
kingdoms.[46]

"Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh," &c.
Asshur seems to be the second son of Shem (v 22). A fit resemblance
of those persons that have come from mystical Babel, to build
their Ninevehs, and Rehoboths, and Calnehs, in all lands. Still
they have pretended religion. That they had their orders from the
apostolical see. That they were the true sons of Shem, or disciples
of Christ. But the seeing Christian should remember, that some of
the children of Shem were in Babel with rebellious Nimrod. That
instead of learning humility of their father, through the pride
and rebellion of their own vain-glorious fancies, they learned
wickedness and rebellion of cursed and prodigious Nimrod.

Hence note, that what cities, that is, churches soever have been
builded by persons that have come from Romish Babel, those builders
and cities are to be suspected for such as had their founder and
foundation from Babel itself. Wherefore let Israel say, "Asshur
shall not save us" (Hosea 14:3), for he shall not save himself
(Num 24:24); but as the star of Jacob ariseth, he shall fade and
perish for ever. So perish all the builders and building that hath
had its pattern from mystical Babel, unless a miracle of grace
prevents.

It was Asshur that carried away the ten tribes (Ezra 4:2); it is
Asshur that joineth with the enemies of the church (Psa 83:8); it
is Asshur that with others upholds the great mart of the nations
(Eze 27:23). Wherefore Asshur and all his company, must at last
go down into their pit (Eze 32:22).

So then, let Augustine the monk, come from Rome into England,
and let him build his Nineveh here; let others go also into other
countries, and build their Resens and Calahs there; these are all
but brats of Babel, and their end shall be, That they perish for
ever. John saw it, and the cities, that is, the churches of the
nations, or the national churches, fell; and great Babylon, their
inventor and founder, "came into remembrance before God, to give
unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath" (Rev
16:19).

Ver. 13, 14. "And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim,
and Naphtuhim, and Pathrusim, and Casluhim, [out of whom came
Philistim,] and Caphtorim."

Ludim, as I suppose, may be the same with Lubim that came up with
the Egyptians and Ethiopians against Israel (2 Chron 12:3; 16:8),
of whose cruelty Nahum complains; where he saith, They also helped
Nineveh against the children of God (3:9). The rest of them were
of the same disposition, especially the Philistine that came of
Casluhim; for they, both in Saul and David's days, were implacable
against the church and people of God; they were a giantish people,
and trusted in their strength, and seldom overcome but when Israel
went against them in the name of the Lord their God.

Ver. 15-18. "And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth, and
the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite, and the Hivite,
and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite,
and the Hamathite: And afterward were the families of the Canaanites
spread abroad."

These are the children of Canaan, the son of Ham, the accursed
of the Lord. These did chiefly possess the land of Canaan before
Israel went out of Egypt: they were a mighty giantish people, yet
Israel must fight with them, notwithstanding they were, in comparison
to these, but as the grasshopper.

Ver. 19. "And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as
thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and
Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha."

They bordered therefore upon the Philistines on the one side (Gen
26:15,18,19); for Gerar and Gaza belonged to them, and they touched
upon Sodom and Gomorrah, &c. on the other (Judg 16:1,21). They
were placed therefore, by the judgment of God, between these two
wicked and sinful people, that they might, as a punishment for
their former sins, be infected with the sight and infection of
their ungodly and monstrous abominations. They that "turn aside
unto their crooked ways, the LORD shall lead them forth with the
workers of iniquity" (Psa 125:5).

Ver. 20. "These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after
their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations."

Ham had a mighty offspring; but the judgment of God was, That they
should be wicked men, idolaters, persecutors, sinners with a high
hand; such as God was resolved to number to the sword, both in
this world, and that to come; I mean, for the generality of them.

Ver. 21. "Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber,
the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born."

The manner of style which the Holy Ghost here useth in his preamble
to the genealogy of Shem, is worthy to be taken notice of; as that
he is called, "the father of all the children of Eber," and "the
brother of Japheth."

By his being called, "the father of all the children of Eber," we
may suppose, that from Eber to Abraham, (by whom the reckoning of
the genealogy was cut off from Eber, and entailed to the name of
Abraham,) all the children of Eber were, as it were, the disciples
of Shem, for he lived awhile after Abraham. His doctrine therefore
they might profess, though possibly with some mixture of those
inventions that came in among men afterwards; which I think were
at the greatest about Abraham's time. Besides, he shews by this,
that the other children of Shem, as Elam, Asshur, Lud and Aram,
with Uz, Hul, Gether and Mash, went away with Nimrod, and the rest
of that company, into idolatry, tyranny and other profaneness; so
that only the line from Shem to Eber, and from thence to Abraham,
&c. were the visible church in those days.

"The brother of Japheth." So he was of Ham, but because Ham was
cut off for his wickedness to his father, therefore both Shem and
Japheth did hold him in abomination, and would not own that relation
that before was between them, especially in things pertaining to
the kingdom of God, and of Christ: Wherefore the Holy Ghost also,
in reckoning up the kindred of Shem, excludeth Ham the younger
brother, and stops after he had mentioned Japheth: "The brother
of Japheth the elder."

"Unto him were children born," unto Shem also. Unto him were
children born: The Holy Ghost doth secretly here, as he did before
in the generation of Seth, insinuate a wonder. For considering the
godliness of Shem, and the ungodliness of Ham, and the multitude
of his tyrannical brood, it is a wonder that there should such a
thing as the offspring of Shem be found upon the face of the earth.
For I am apt to think that Shem, with his posterity, did testify
against the actions of Nimrod; as also against the children of
Ham, in their wickedness and rebellion against the way of God; as
may be hinted after. Wherefore he, with his seed, were in jeopardy,
among that tumultuous generation. Yet God preserved him and his
seed upon the face of the earth. For let the number and wickedness
of men be never so great in the world, there must be also a church,
by whose actions the ways of the wicked must be condemned.

Ver. 22. "The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad,
and Lud, and Aram."

These children were born unto Shem: The book of Chronicles mentions
four more, as Uz, and Hul, and Gether, Meshech, or Mash; but these
were the natural sons of Aram, Shem being only their father's
father.

Elam and Asshur, as also Lud and Aram, notwithstanding they were
the sons of Shem, struck off, as I think, with Nimrod, and left
their father, for the glory of Babel; yea, they had a province
there in the days of Daniel (8:2). Wherefore great judgments are
threatened against Elam; as, That Elam shall drink the cup of God's
fury: That their bow shall be broken: That God would bring upon
him the four winds (Jer 49:36). And, That there should be no nation
whither the captives of Elam should not come: Yet God would save
them in the latter days (v 39).

As for Lud although through the wickedness of his heart he forsook
his father Shem, and so the true religion; yet a promise is made
of his conversion, when God calls home the children of Japheth,
and persuadeth them to dwell in the tents of Shem. "I will set
a sign among them [saith God,] and I will send those that escape
of them, unto the nations to Tarshish, Pul and Lud,--to Tubal and
Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame" (Isa
66:19). Yea, thus it shall be, although they were once the soldiers
of the adversaries of the church, and bare the shield and helmet
against her (Eze 27:10). Of Asshur I have spoken before. Aram became
also an heathen, and dwelt among the mountains of the east: Out
of him came Balaam the soothsayer that Balak sent for, to curse
the children of Israel (Num 23:7).

In Arphaxad, though he was not the eldest, remained the line that
went from Abraham to David; and from him to Jesus Christ (Luke
3:36).

Ver. 23. "And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and
Mash."

Uz went also off from Shem, but yet good men came from his loins;
for Job himself was of that land (Job 1:1). Yet the wrath of God
was threatened to go forth against them, because they had a hand
in the persecution of the children of Israel, &c. (Jer 25:20; Lam
4:21).

Ver. 24, 25. "And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber. And
unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for in
his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan."

This Eber was a very godly man, the next after Shem that vigorously
stood up to maintain religion. Two things are entailed upon him to
his everlasting honour: First, The children of God, even Abraham
himself, was not ashamed to own himself one of this man's disciples,
or followers; and hence he is called Abraham the Hebrew, or Ebrew
(Gen 14:13). Joseph also will have it go there: I was stolen (said
he) out of the land of the Hebrews (Gen 40:15). Nay, the Lord God
himself, to show how he honoured this man's faith and life, doth
style himself the God of his fathers, to wit, the God of the
Hebrews, the Lord God of the Hebrews (Exo 3:18; 7:16; 9:1,13).
Secondly, This was the man that kept that language with which Adam
was created, and that in which God spake to the fathers of old,
from being corrupted and confounded by the confusion of Babel;
and therefore it is for ever called his, the Hebrew tongue (John
5:2; 19:13,20), the tongue in which Christ spake from heaven to
and by Saul (Acts 21:40; 22:2; 26:14). This man therefore, was
a stiff opposer of Nimrod; neither had he a hand in the building
of Babel; for all that had, had their language confounded by that
strange judgment of God.

"And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg,
[or Division,] for in his days was the earth divided; and his
brother's name was Joktan." This division, in mine opinion, was
not only that division that was made by the confusion of tongues,
but a division also that was made among men by the blessed doctrine
of God, which most eminently rested in the bosom of Shem and
Eber, neither of which had their hands in the monstrous work.[47]
Wherefore, as Eber by abstaining kept entire the holy language; so
Shem, to shew that he was clear from this sin also, is by the Holy
Ghost called, "The father of all the children of Eber." Implying,
that Eber and Shem did mightily labour to preserve a seed from
the tyranny and pollution of Nimrod and Babel; and by that means
made a division in the earth; unto whom because the rebels would
not adhere, therefore did God the Lord smite them with confusion
of tongues, and scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

Ver. 26. "And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth,
and Jerah."

Here again he hath left the holy line, which is from Eber to
Abraham, and makes a stop upon Joktan's genealogy, and so comes
down to the building of Babel.

Ver. 27-30. "These therefore begat Joktan": He also begat "Hadoram,
and Uzal, and Diklah, and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba; and Ophir,
and Havilah, and Johab: All these were the sons of Joktan.--And
their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goes, unto Sephar a mount
of the east."

Ver. 31. "These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after
their tongues, in their lands, after their nations."

Moses, as I said, by this relation, respecteth, and handleth chiefly
those, or them persons, who were at first the planters of the world
after the flood; leaving the church, or a relation of that, and
its seed, to be discoursed after the building of Babel, unto the
tenth verse of the next chapter. Hence methinks one might gather,
that these above mentioned, whose genealogies are handled at
large, as the families of Japheth, of Ham, and Joktan are, were
both, in their persons and offsprings engaged (some few only
excepted, who might adhere to Noah, Shem, and Eber) in that foul
work, the building of Babel. Now that which inclineth me thus to
think, it is because immediately after their thus being reckoned
by Moses, even before he taketh up the genealogy of Shem, he
bringeth in the building thereof; the which he not only mentioneth,
but also enlargeth upon; yea, and also telleth of the cause of
the stopping of that work, before he returneth to the church, and
the line that went from Shem to Abraham.

Ver. 32. "These are the families of the sons of Noah after their
generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided
in the earth after the flood."

CHAPTER XI.

Ver. 1. "And the whole earth was of one language, and of one
speech."

Moses having thus briefly passed through the genealogies of
Japheth, Ham, and Joktan; in the next place he cometh to shew us
their works which they had by this time engaged to do; and that
was, to build a Babel, whose tower might reach to heaven. Now,
in order to this their work, or rather to his relation thereof,
he maketh a short fore-speech, which consisteth of two branches.
The first is, That now they had all one language or lip.[48] The
other was, That they yet had kept themselves together, either
resting or walking, as an army compact. An excellent resemblance
of the state of the church, before she imagined to build her
a Babel. For till then, however one might outstrip another in
knowledge and love; yet so far as they obtained, their language
or lip was but one. Having but one heart, and one soul, they with
one mouth did glorify God, even the Father.

"And the whole earth was of one language." By these words therefore,
we may conceive the reason why so great a judgment as that great
wickedness, Babel, should be contrived, and endeavoured to be
accomplished. The multitude was one. Not but that it is a blessed
thing for the church to be one: as Christ saith, "My beloved is
but one" (John 17:11). But here was an oneness, not only in the
church, but in her mixing with the world. The whole earth, among
which, as I suppose, is included Noah, Shem, and others; who
being overtopt by Nimrod, the mighty hunter, might company with
him until he began to build Babel. Therefore it is said in the
next verse, that they companied together from the east, to the
land of Shinar.

Hence note, That the first and primitive churches were safe and
secure, so long as they kept entire by themselves; but when once
they admitted of a mixture, great Babel, as a judgment of God, was
admitted to come into their mind.

Ver. 2. "And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that
they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there."

By these words, we gather, that the first rest of Noah, and so
the inhabiting of his posterity, was still eastward from Babylon,
towards the sun rising.

But to gospelise: They journeyed from the east: and so consequently
they turned their backs upon the rising of the sun. So did also
the primitive church, in the day when she began to decline from
her first and purest state. Indeed, so long as she kept close to
the doctrine and discipline of the gospel, according to the word
and commandment of the Lord Jesus, then she kept her face still
towards the sun rising: According to the type in Ezekiel, who saith
of the second and mystical temple, Her fore front, or face, did
stand towards the east (47:1). Also he saith, when he saw the glory
of God, how it came unto this temple, it came from the way of the
east (43:2). Their journeying therefore from the east, was, their
turning their backs upon the sun. And to us, in gospel times, it
holdeth forth such a mystery as this: That their journey was thus
recorded, to show they were now apostatized; for assuredly they
had turned their back upon the glorious Sun of Righteousness, as
upon that which shineth in the firmament of heaven.

"They found a plain in the land of Shinar." Shinar is the land of
Babylon (Dan 1:2; Zech 5:11), as those scriptures in the margin
declare.

"They found a plain." Or, place of fatness and plenty, as usually
the plains are; and are, upon that account, great content to our
flesh: This made Lot separate from Abraham, and choose to dwell with
the sinners of Sodom; why, the country was a plain, and therefore
fat and plentiful, even like the garden of the Lord, and the land
of Egypt. Here therefore they made a stop; here they dwelt and
continued together. A right resemblance of the degenerators'
course in the days of general apostacy from the true apostolical
doctrine, to the church of our Romish Babel. So long as the church
endured hardship, and affliction, she was greatly preserved from
revolts and backslidings; but after she had turned her face from
the sun, and had found the plain of Shinar; that is, the fleshly
contents that the pleasures, and profits, and honours of this world
afford; she forgetting the word and order of God, was content,
with Lot, to pitch towards Sodom; or, with the travellers in the
text, to dwell in the land of Babel.

Ver. 3. "And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick,
and burn them thoroughly [and burn them to a burning]. And they
had brick for stone, and slime had they for mortar."

Now they being filled with ease and plenty, they begin to lift
up the horn, and to consult one with another what they were best
to do: Whereupon, after some time of debate, they came to this
conclusion, That they would go build a Babel.

"And they said one to another, Go to." This manner of phrase is
often used in scripture; and is some times, as also here, used to
show, That the thing intended, must come to pass, what opinion or
contradiction to the contrary soever there be. It argueth that a
judgment is made in the case, and proceedings shall be accordingly.
Thus it is also to be taken in Judges 7:3; Ecclesiastes 2:1; Isaiah
5:5; James 5:1, &c. Wherefore it shows, that these men had cast
off the fear of God, and, like Israel in the days of the prophet
Jeremiah, they resolved to follow their own imagination, let God
or his judgments speak never so loud to the contrary. And so indeed
he says of them at verse the sixth: "And this they begin to do:
[saith God] and now nothing will be restrained from them."

This is all Mr. Bunyan hath writ of this EXPOSITION, as we perceive
by the blank paper following the manuscript.[49]


FOOTNOTES:


[1]Although no mortal mind can by searching find out the Almighty to
perfection, yet Bunyan's views of the Divine Being is an approach
to perfection. It is worthy the pen of the most profound Christian
philosopher.--Ed.

[2]The more extensive our inquiries are into the wonders of
creation, the more deeply will our souls be humbled. The answer to
the inquiry, "What is man?" can then, and only then, be made in
the language of Isaiah, "Nothing--vanity--a drop of a bucket--the
small dust of the balance," 40:15.--Ed.

[3]How sad, but true, is this type of many governments, especially
of the olden times; the strong devour the weak--strong in person or
by subtilty, or by combination. Should this earth ever be blessed
with a Christian government, the governors will exclusively seek
the welfare and happiness of the governed.--Ed.

[4]This is one of those beautiful discoveries which modern geology
fully confirms. The earth is created, matured, prepared and fitted
for him, before man is created. That modern popular work, "The
Vestiges of Creation," elucidates the same fact from the phenomena
of nature: but the philosopher who wrote that curious book little
thought that these sublime truths were published more than a century
and a half ago, by an unlettered mechanic, whose sole source of
knowledge was his being deeply learned in the holy oracles. They
discover in a few words that which defies centuries of philosophic
researches of the most learned men. A wondrous book is God's
Book!--Ed.

[5]In what pointed language are these solemn warnings put. Reader,
in the sight of god, let the heart-searching inquiry of the
apostle's be yours; Lord, is it I?

[6]Bunyan beautifully illustrates this view of divine truth
in his controversy with Edward Fowler, Bishop of Gloucester. See
"The Defence of the Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Jesus
Christ."--Ed.

[7]Christian, you are specially cautioned to "beware of the
flatterer." The Pilgrim's Christian and Hopeful forgot the caution,
and "a man black of flesh but covered with a very light robe,
caught them in his net, and they were chastised sore."--Ed.

[8]Much allowance must be made for the state of female education in
Bunyan's days. Every effort was made to keep women in subordination--a
mere drudging, stocking mending help meet for man. Now we feel
that the more highly she is cultivated, the more valuable help she
becomes, and that in intellect she is on a perfect equality with
man.--Ed.

[9] "And sensed." Not now used as a verb. The meaning is, that Eve,
instead of instantly rejecting the temptation, because contrary
to God's command, she reasoned upon it, and sought counsel of her
carnal senses.--Ed.

[10]This passage would have done honour to Bishop Taylor, or any
one of our best English writers. How blessed are we, if our eyes
have been thus painfully opened to see and feel the awful state
into which sin plunges us.--Ed.

[11]How solemn are these awful facts, and how impressively does
Bunyan fix them on our hears. As Adam and Eve attempted to hide
their guilt and themselves by fig-leaves and bushes, so does man
now endeavour to screen his guilt from the omniscient eye of God
by refuges of lies, which, like the miserable fig-leaf apron, will
be burnt up by the presence of God. Oh, sinner! seek shelter in
the robe of the Redeemer's righteousness; the presence of your God
will add to its lustre, and make it shine brighter and brighter.--Ed.

[12]The remaining words of this alarming verse are very striking,
"Though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence
will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them." Oh, sinner!
whither can you flee from the punishment of sin, but to the Saviour's
bosom? Leave your sins and fly to him; that almighty eternal refuge
is open night and day.--Ed.

[13]How art thou fallen, oh Adam! thus to lay the blame of thy
sin upon God,--"the woman whom thou gavest me," she tempted me.
Well does Bunyan term these defences--pitiful fumbling speeches,
faulteringly made. How would the glorified spirits of Adam and Aaron
embrace him, when he entered heaven, for such honest dealing.--Ed.

[14]A decided Christian cannot obey human laws affecting divine
worship. All such are of Antichrist; "Ye cannot obey God and
mammon." God requires an undivided allegiance.--Ed.

[15]Genevan or Puritan version.

[16]Many are the anxieties, sorrows, and pains, that females undergo,
from which man is comparatively exempt. How tenderly then ought
they to be cherished.--Ed.

[17]Most married men find this to be an exceedingly difficult
duty. There are few Eves but whose dominant passion is to rule a
husband. Perhaps the only way to govern a wife is to lead her to
think that she rules, while in fact she is ruled. One of the late
Abraham Booth's maxims to young ministers, was, If you would rule
in your church, so act as to allow them to think that they rule
you.--Ed.

[18] "By themselves." This does not mean without human company, but
"without divine aid," without the sanction and presence of God.--Ed.

[19]There is no error more universal, nor more fatal, than that which
Bunyan here, as well as in other of his treatises, so admirably
elucidates and explodes. No sooner does a poor sinner feel the
necessity of flying from the wrath to come, than Satan suggests
that some good works must be pleaded, instead of casting the soul,
burthened with sin, upon the compassion of the Lord, and pleading
for unconditional mercy. Good works must flow from, but cannot be
any cause of grace.--Ed.

[20]Adversaries to Christ and his church, although professing to
be Christians; worshipping according to "the traditions of men,"
and putting the saints into wretched prisons, and to a frightful
death. An awful state of self-delusion; how Cain-like!--Ed.

[21]If it be asked, Why take your unregenerate children, and invite
the ungodly, to the place of worship? Our answer is, THERE the Lord
is pleased to meet with sinners--convince, convert, and purify
them--giving them a good hope that their persons and services are
accepted.--Ed.

[22]How awfully is this illustrated by acts of uniformity. If it
be lawful to pass such acts, it must be requisite and a duty to
enforce them. It was this that filled Europe with tears, and the
saints with anguish, especially in Piedmont, France, and England.
Mercifully, the tyrant Antichrist's power is curtailed.--Ed.

[23]How solemn are these injunctions, and how opposed to the violent
conduct of mankind. A most appalling murder has been committed;--a
virtuous and pious young man is brutally murdered by his
only brother:--what is the divine judgment? If any man kill him,
vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold: set a mark upon
him--drive him from the abodes of man--shut him up in a cage like
a wild beast--but shed not his blood.--Ed.

[24]When Bunyan was in prison, under sentence to be hung, all his
thoughts were, not how to escape, but, how so to suffer as to
glorify God; "I thought with myself if I should make a scrabbling
shift to clamber up the ladder, yet I should either with quaking
or other symptoms of faintings, give occasion to the enemy to
reproach the way of God and his people for their timorousness.
This, therefore, lay with great trouble upon me, for, methought, I
was ashamed to die with a pale face and tottering knees for such
a cause as this."--Grace Abounding, No. 334.--Ed.

[25]Bunyan has taken the meaning of all these Scripture names from
the first table to the Genevan or Puritan version, vulgarly called
"The Breeches Bible," as invaluable translation.--Ed.

[26]Bunyan, after suffering much, and witnessing the cruel havoc
made with the church of God in his time, fell asleep in peace on the
eve of the glorious revolution;--while many of his cotemporaries
did, he did not "live to see it." He died August 31, 1688--as
James the Second fled and lost his crown on the 11th of December
following.--Ed.

[27] "And yet there is room." As in Christ, the ark of his church,
so it was in Noah's ark. The best calculations, allowing eighteen
inches to a cubit, show that the ark was capable of receiving many
more than this selection from all the animals now known, together
with their requisite provender. Dr. Hunter estimated the tonnage
at 42,413 tons measurement.--Ed.

[28]How astonishing is the fact, that man dares to introduce
his miserable inventions to deform the scriptural simplicity
of divine worship; as if HE who make all things perfect, had,
in this important institution, forgotten to direct the use of
liturgies--organs--vestments--pomps and ceremonies. When will man,
with child-like simplicity, follow gospel rules?--Ed.

[29]How mysterious are God's ways: some animals of every kind are
saved, and all the rest destroyed. So throughout every age some
animals have been treated with kindness, and others of the same
species cruelly maltreated. Can those who stumble at the doctrine
of election, account for this difference. Reason must submit with
reverence to the voice of Christ; "What I do, thou knowest not
NOW; but thou shalt know hereafter."--Ed.

[30] "Item," a new article added; a caution or warning.--Ed.

[31]Every edition, but the first, has left out Noah's sons!! from
the ark, while they all put in his sons' wives.--Ed.

[32]They perish in sight of a place of security which they cannot
reach; they perish with the bitter remorse of having despised and
rejected the means of escape, like the rich man in hell, whose
torment was grievously augmented by the sight of Lazarus, afar
off, in the bosom of Abraham.--Ed.

[33]Calmet says, "Apres que l'Arche eut fait le tour du monde
pendant l'espace de six mois."--Supplement to Dictionary. He gives
no authority for this improbable notion.--Ed.

[34] "A graceless clergy"!! So numerous as to cover the ground of
our land!! How awful a fact--taking the name of God on polluted
lips, and professing to teach what they do not comprehend. Men in
a state of rebellion against heaven, calling upon others to submit
to God's gospel. Solemn hypocrites, fearful will be your end.--Ed.

[35]This should prompt every professing Christian to self-examination--Am
I of the raven class, or that of the dove? May my heart, while
trembling at the thought that there are ravens in the church,
appeal to the heart-searching God, "Lord, is it I?"--Ed.

[36]This may have suggested an idea to Bunyan in writing the second
part of his Pilgrim. In the battle between Great Heart and Giant
Maul the sophist, after an hour's hard fighting, "they sat down
to rest them, but Mr. Great Heart betook him to prayer. When they
had rested them, and taken breath, they both fell to it again."--Ed.

[37]Instead of progressing to the meridian sunshine of Christianity,
they have retrograded to a darker gloom than the twilight of Judaism.
Still, some vestiges of knowledge remain--some idea of a future
state, and of sacrifice for sin. Christian, how blessed art thou!
How ought your light to shine among men, to the glory of your
heavenly Father!--Ed.

[38] "The beginning," the foundation; that which is essential to the
existence, as, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom."
Take away the fear of the Lord, and this heavenly wisdom ceaseth
to exist.--Ed.

[39]That absurd jumble, called "The Koran," mentions a fourth son
of Noah, named Kinan, who refused to enter the ark with his family,
preferring to trust them on the top of a mountain, where they all
perished. See the chapter entitled "Hod."--Ed.

[40]Faithful is the record of Holy Writ. No excuse is offered for
the sin of this great patriarch. Grapes eaten from the vine, or
after having been dried, are nutritious, like grain from the ear
of corn; pressed out and fermented, they lose that nutriment--acquire a
fiery force--mount to the brain--lead reason captive--and triumphs
over decency: the most enlightened man becomes the savage.--Ed.

[41]To prick--to incite--to spur--to dress oneself for show; thus it
was commonly used in Bunyan's time, but in this sense has become
obsolete.--Ed.

[42]To resent--to consider as an injury or affront--to take ill.--Ed.

[43]How dreadfully was this exemplified in the cruelties perpetrated
on the dissenters in the valleys of Piedmont, and on the English
dissenters in the reign of Mary, of Elizabeth, and of the Stuarts.--Ed.

[44] "The hunting tribes of air and earth, Respect the brethren of
their birth; The eagle pounces on the lamb; The wolf devours the
fleecy dam; Even tiger fell, and sullen bear, Their likeness and
their lineage spare. Man only mars this household plan, And turns
the fierce pursuit on man; Since Nimrod, Cush's mighty son, At
first the bloody game begun." Scott's Rokeby

[45]Great allowances might be made for Bunyan's severe language
with respect to state interference in matters of faith and worship,
because he so cruelly suffered by it in his own person. But had he
escaped persecution, the same awful reflections are just and true.
If a Christian monarchy robs, imprisons, and murders dissenters,
surely a Mohammedan state may do the same to all those who refuse
to curse Christ and bless Mahomet. Bunyan appears to consider
that the great wickedness of man which caused the flood arose from
the state interfering with faith and worship. This is certainly a
fruitful source of those dreadful crimes, hypocrisy and persecution,
but whether it was the cause of that awful event, the flood, or
of that splendid absurdity, the tower of Babel, the reader must
judge for himself.--Ed.

[46]First Rome, then the Greek and Russian church; then Henry the
VIII and the church over which that lascivious monster was the
supreme head; then the Lutheran church of Germany and Holland; and
then...How admirably true is the genealogy of Antichrist as drawn
out by Bunyan.--Ed.

[47] "That monstrous work," the attempting to build the tower of
Babel.--Ed.

[48] "Language or lip." A lip, is also used for speech. In the
figurative language, "of one lip," means that they all spoke one
language; so in Job 11:2, literally, "a man of lips," is translated
"a man full of talk."--Ed.

[49]That Bunyan intended to have continued this commentary there can
be no doubt, not only from the abrupt termination of his labours,
and the blank paper following the manuscript, but from an observation
he makes on the sabbath--the sabbath of years, the jubilee, &c.,
"of all which, more in their place, IF GOD PERMIT." See Genesis
2:3.--Ed.

***

A HOLY LIFE THE BEAUTY OF CHRISTIANITY: or, AN EXHORTATION TO
CHRISTIANS TO BE HOLY. BY JOHN BUNYAN.

Holiness becometh thine house, O Lord, for ever.'--[Psalm 93:5]

London, by B. W., for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible, in the
Poultrey. 1684.


THE EDITOR'S ADVERTISEMENT.

This is the most searching treatise that has ever fallen under
our notice. It is an invaluable guide to those sincere Christians,
who, under a sense of the infinite importance of the salvation of
an immortal soul, and of the deceitfulness of their hearts, sigh
and cry, "O Lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest
the reins (most secret thoughts) and the heart.' "Try MY reins and
my heart.' for it is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked: who can know it? I the Lord search the heart, I try the
reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his doings.' He, in whose heart the Holy Spirit
has raised the solemn inquiry, What must I do to be saved?' flies
from his own estimate of himself, with distrust and fear, and
appeals to an infallible and unerring scrutiny. Search me, O God,
and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: And see if there
be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.'
Reader, are you desirous of having your hopes of pardon, and of
heaven, weighed in the unerring balances of the sanctuary; while
you are yet in a state of probation? Meditate and ponder over
this faithful little work. If accompanied by the Divine blessing,
it will test your faith and practice in the crucible and by the
fire of God's word. It is intended to turn your spirit inside
out--to lay bare every insidious enemy that may have crept in and
lie lurking in the walls of Mansoul. It exhibits sin in all its
hideous deformity, stript of its masquerade and disguises; so that
it appears, what it really is, the great enemy to human happiness.
It is calculated to stir up our pure minds to incessant vigilance,
lest we should wander upon tempting, but forbidden paths; and be
caught by Giant Despair, to become the object of his cruelty in
Doubting Castle.

This work was first published in 1684, in a pocket volume,
comprising nine sheets duodecimo; but became so rare, as to have
escaped the researches of Wilson, Whitefield, and other editors
of the collected works of Mr. Bunyan,--until about the year 1780,
when it was first re-published in an edition of his works, with
notes, by Mason and Ryland. The evident object of this treatise
was to aid Christian efforts, under the Divine blessing, in
stemming the torrent of iniquity, which, like an awful flood, was
overspreading this country. The moral and religious restraints,
which the government under the Commonwealth had imposed, were
dissolved by the accession of a debauched prince to the throne of
England; a prince who was bribed, to injure or destroy the best
interests of the country, by the voluptuous court of France. He
had taken refuge there from the storm; and had been defiled and
corrupted beyond ordinary conception. The king and his court were
surrounded by pimps, panders, courtesans, and flatterers. The
example of the court spread throughout the country--religion became
a jest and laughing-stock; and those who were not to be cajoled
out of their soul's eternal happiness--whose vital godliness
preserved them in the midst of such evil examples and allurements,
were persecuted with unrelenting rigour. The virtuous Lord
William Russel, and the illustrious Sydney, fell by the hands of
the executioner: John Hampden was fined forty thousand pounds.
The hand of God was stretched out. An awful pestilence carried
off nearly seventy thousand of the inhabitants of London. In the
following year, that rich and glorious city, with the cathedral--the
churches--public buildings-and warehouses, replenished with
merchandise--were reduced to ashes. The Dutch fleet sailed up the
Thames and threatened destruction to our navy, and even to the
government,--filling the court and country with terror. Still
profligacy reigned in the court and country--a fearful persecution
raged against all who refused to attend the church service. Thousands
perished in prison, and multitudes were condemned to expatriate
themselves. The timid and irresolute abandoned the faith,--desolation
spread over the church of God. At this time, at imminent risk, John
Bunyan not only fearlessly preached, but published his faithful
Advice to Sufferers;' which was immediately followed by this
important work, calling upon every one who named the name of
Christ, 'at all hazards, to depart from iniquity.' They were words
in season,' and were good,' like apples of gold in pictures of
silver.' (Prov. 25:11)

The contrast in public manners must have been painfully felt by
one, who had seen and enjoyed the general appearances, and doubtless
many real proofs of piety, which prevailed under the protectorate
of Cromwell. He was now called to witness the effects of open
and avowed wickedness among governors and nobles, by which the
fountains of iniquity were opened up, and a flood of immorality let
loose upon all classes; demoralizing the nation, and distressing
the church. It must have been difficult to form any thing like
an accurate estimate of the number of those who abandoned their
Christian profession. The immoral conduct of one bad man is more
conspicuous than the unobtrusive holiness of ninety-nine good men;
more especially, when a professor becomes profane. Thus Bunyan
argues, 'One black sheep is quickly espied among five hundred
white ones, and one mangey one will soon infect many. One also,
among the saints, that is not clean, is a blemish to the rest,
and as Solomon says, 'One sinner destroyeth much good.' p. 527. It
is more congenial to our fallen nature to notice, and be grieved
with, evil conduct, than it is to rejoice over that excellence
which may cast the observer into the shade; besides the jaundiced
fear that good works may arise from improper motives. These principles
equally applied to the state of society under the Presbyterian
government: but when the restoration to the old system took place,
so vast a change passed over society, like a pestilence, 'that sin,
through custom, became no sin. The superfluity of naughtiness,'
says Bunyan, 'is at this day become no sin with many.' p. 509.
'There are a good many professors now in England that have nothing
to distinguish them from the worst of men,' but their praying,
reading, hearing of sermons, baptism, church fellowship, and
breaking of bread. Separate them but from these, and every where
else they are as black as others, even in their whole life and
conversation.' p. 508. 'It is marvellous to me to see sin so high
amidst the swarms of professors that are found in every corner
of this land.' If the conduct of many professors were so vile, as
there can be no doubt but that it was, how gross must have been
that of the openly profane? It accounts for the wicked wit and
raillery of Hudibras, when so many professors threw off the mask
and gloried in their hypocrisy--Butler shut his eyes to the cruel
sufferings of thousands who perished in jails, the martyrs to the
sincerity of their faith and conduct. The falling away was indeed
great; and Bunyan, with all earnestness, warns his readers that,
'To depart from iniquity is to shun those examples, those beastly
examples to drunkenness--to whoredom--to swearing--to lying--to
stealing--to sabbath-breaking--to pride--to covetousness--to
deceit--to hypocrisy, that in every corner of the country present
themselves to men.' p. 517. 'O the fruits of repentance thick sown
by preachers, come up but thinly! Where are they found? Confession
of sin, shame for sin, amendment of life, restitution for cozening,
cheating, defrauding, beguiling thy neighbour,--where shall these
fruits of repentance be found? Repentance is the bitter pill,
without the sound working of which, base and sinful humour rest
unstirred, unpurged, undriven out of the soul.' p. 519.

'I would not be austere,' said Bunyan, 'but were wearing of gold,
putting on of apparel, dressing up houses, decking of children,
learning of compliments, boldness in women, lechery in men, wanton
behaviour, lascivious words, and tempting carriages, signs of
repentance; then I must say, the fruits of repentance swarm in our
land.' 'The tables of God's book are turned upside down. Love,
to their doctrine, is gone out of the country.' 'Love is gone, and
now coveting, pinching, griping, and such things, are in fashion;
now iniquity abounds instead of grace, in many that name the name
of Christ.' p. 529, 520. 'Alas! alas! there is a company of half
priests in the world; they dare not teach the people the whole
counsel of God, because they would condemn themselves, and their
manner of living in the world: where is that minister now to
be found, that dare say to his people, walk as you have me for
an example, or that dare say, what you see and hear to be in me,
do, and the God of peace shall be with you.' p. 520. Such was the
general character of the parish priests, after the black Bartholomew
Act had driven the pious and godly ministers from the parish
churches. It is almost a miracle that Bunyan escaped persecution
for his plain dealing. We cannot wonder, that under such teachers,
'Christians learned to be proud one of another, to be covetous,
to be treacherous, and false, to be cowardly in God's matters, to
be remiss and negligent in christian duties, one of another.' p.
525. A scandal was thus brought upon religion. 'Upon this I write
with a sigh; for never more than now. There is no place where the
professors of religion are, that is free from offence and scandal.
Iniquity is so entailed to religion, and baseness of life to the
naming the name of Christ, that 'All places are full of vomit and
filthiness.' 'Ah! Lord God, this is a lamentation, that a sore
disease is got into the church of God.' p. 529. It was a period
when a more awful plague raged as to morals and religion, than
that which, about the same time, had ravaged London with temporal
death--the plague of hypocrisy--of naming the name of Christ, and
still living in sin. 'Hypocrisies are of that nature, that they
spread themselves over the mind as the leprosy does over the body.
It gets in the pulpit, in conference, in closets, in communion of
saints, in faith, in love, in repentance, in zeal, in humility,
in alms, in the prison, and in all duties, and makes the whole a
loathsome stink in the nostrils of God.' p. 538 These licentious
times, in which we live, are full of iniquity.' p. 539. 'They change
one bad way for another, hopping, as the squirrel, from bough to
bough, but not willing to forsake the tree,--from drunkards to be
covetous, and from that to pride and lasciviousness--this is a grand
deceit, common, and almost a disease epidemical among professors.'
p. 532. 'The sins of our day are conspicuous and open as Sodom's
were; pride and covetousness, loathing of the gospel, and contemning
holiness, have covered the face of the nation.' p. 534. The infection
had spread into the households of professors. 'Bless me, saith a
servant, are those the religious people! Are these the servants
of God, where iniquity is made so much of, and is so highly
entertained! And now is his heart filled with prejudice against
all religion, or else he turns hypocrite like his master and
his mistress, wearing, as they, a cloak of religion to cover all
abroad, while all naked and shameful at home.' p. 536. 'He looked
for a house full of virtue, and behold nothing but spider-webs;
fair and plausible abroad, but like the sow in the mire at home.'
The immoral taint infected the young. '0! it is horrible to
behold how irreverently, how easily, and malapertly, children,
yea, professing children, at this day, carry it to their parents;
snapping and checking, curbing and rebuking of them, as if they
had received a dispensation from God to dishonour and disobey
parents.' p. 535. 'This day, a sea and deluge of iniquity has
drowned those that have a form of godliness. Now immorality shall,
with professors, be in fashion, be pleaded for, be loved and more
esteemed than holiness; even those that have a form of godliness,
hate the life and power thereof, yea, they despise them that are
good.' p. 543.

This melancholy picture of vice and profligacy was drawn by one
whose love of truth rendered him incapable of deceit or of
exaggeration. It was published at the time, and was unanswered,
because unanswerable. It was not painted from imagination by an
ascetic; but from life by an enlightened observer--not by the poor
preaching mechanic when incarcerated in a jail for his godliness;
but when his painful sufferings were past--when his Pilgrim,
produced by the folly of persecutors, had rendered him famous through
Europe--when his extraordinary pulpit talents were matured and
extensively known, so that thousands crowded to hear him preach--when
his labours were sought in London and in the country--when his
opportunities of observation had become extended far beyond most of
his fellow-ministers. The tale is as true as it is full of painful
interest. The causes of all this vice are perfectly apparent.
Whenever a government abuses its powers by interfering with divine
worship--by preferring one sect above all others; whether it be
Presbyterian, Independent, or Episcopalian--such a requiring the
things that are God's to be rendered unto Caesar, must be the
prolific source of persecution, hypocrisy, and consequent immorality
and profaneness. The impure process of immorality as checked by
the rival labours of all the sects to promote vital godliness.
Can we wonder that such a state of society was not long permitted
to exist? In three troublous years from the publication of this
book, the licentious monarch was swept away by death, not without
suspicion of violence, and his besotted popish successor fled to
die in exile. An enlightened monarch was placed upon the vacant
throne, and persecution was deprived of its tiger claws and teeth
by the act of toleration.

However interesting to the christian historian, and humbling to
human pride, the facts may be which are here disclosed; it was
not the author's intention thus to entertain his readers. No; this
invaluable tract has an object in view of far greater importance. It
is an earnest, affectionate, but pungent appeal to all professors
of every age, and nation, and sect, to the end of time. The
admonition of the text is to you, my reader, and to me; whether
we be rich or poor, ministers or ministered unto, it comes home
equally to every heart, from the mightiest potentate through
every grade of society to the poorest peasant. May the sound ever
reverberate in our ears and be engraven upon our hearts, 'Let
every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.'

The analysis of this book exhibits--How solemn a thing it is to name
the name of Christ, as the author and finisher of our faith--God
manifest in the flesh, to bear the curse for us, and to work out
our everlasting salvation. The hosts of heaven rejoice over the
penitent sinner ransomed from the pit of wrath. Is it possible for
the soul that has escaped eternal burnings--that has experienced
the bitterness and exceeding sinfulness of sin--that has felt the
misery of transgression--that has been brought up out of that deep
and horrible pit--to backslide and plunge again into misery, with
his eyes open to see the smoke of their torments ascending up
before him? Is it possible that he should heedlessly enter the
vortex, and be again drawn into wretchedness? Yes; it is alas too
true. Well may the Lord, by his prophet, use these striking words,
'Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid,
be ye very desolate, saith the Lord. For my people have committed
two evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters,
and hewed out broken cisterns, that can hold no water.' (Jer.
2:12,13)

The extreme folly of such conduct would render the fact almost
incredible, did we not too frequently witness it in others, and
feel it in our own hearts. This volume places these facts plainly
before us, and affectionately exhorts us to be watchful, and
diligently to inquire into the causes of such evil, and the remedies
which ought to be applied. It shews us the great varieties that
are found in the tempers and qualities of God's children, in words
calculated to make an indelible impression.

'But in this great house of God there will not only be golden and
silver Christians, but wooden and earthly ones. And if any man
purge himself from these [earthly ones], from their companies and
vices, he shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified, and meet for
the masters use, and prepared for every good work.' p. 518 Bunyan
earnestly cautions his readers to constant watchfulness, 'for sin
is one of the most quick and brisk things that are.' p. 515. And
jealousy over ourselves, lest our hearts should deceive us. 'The
young man in the gospel that cried to Christ to shew him the way
to life, had some love to his salvation; but it was not a love that
was strong as death, cruel as the grave, and hotter than coals of
juniper.' (Song 8:6) It cost nothing--no self denial, no sacrifice.
'Such will love as long as mouth and tongue can wag' will pray and
hear sermons, but will not cut off a darling lust; such deceive
their own souls. Some are allured but not changed: 'There is some
kind of musicalness in the word; when well handled and fingered
by a skilful preacher,' it has a momentary influence; 'they hear
thy words, but do them not.' (Eze. 33:30) Above all things, beware
of hypocrisy, for when it once enters, it spreads over the soul,
as the leprosy does over the body. p. 521. 'He is the same man,
though he has got a new mouth. p. 532. 'Many that shew like saints
abroad, yet act the part of devils when they are at home. Wicked
professors are practical atheists. 'The dirty life of a professor
lays stumbling blocks in the way of the blind.' p. 545. 'A professor
that hath not forsaken his iniquity, is like one that comes out
of the pest-house, among the whole, with his plaguey sores running
upon him. This is the man that hath the breath of a dragon;
he poisons the air round about him. This is the man that slays
his children, his kinsmen, his friend, and himself. They are the
devil's most stinking tail, with which he casts many a professor
into carnal delights, with their filthy conversations.' p. 530.
'Oh! the millstone that God will shortly hang about your necks, when
the time is come that you must be drowned in the sea and deluge
of God's wrath.' p. 530. Rather than thus rush upon Jehovah's
fiercest anger, 'Tell the world, if you will not depart from
iniquity, that Christ and you are parted, and that you have left
him to be embraced by them to whom iniquity is an abomination.'
p. 530. Thus faithfully and affectionately did Bunyan deal with
his hearers and readers. And he takes an occasion, now in his
maturer years, to confirm the sentiments which he had formerly
published in his 'Differences in Judgment about Water Baptism
no Bar to Communion.' 'It is strange to see at this day how,
notwithstanding, all the threatenings of God, men are wedded to
their own opinions, beyond what the law of grace and love will
admit. Here is a Presbyterian, here an Independent, here a Baptist,
so joined each man to his own opinion, that they cannot have that
communion one with another, as by the testament of the Lord Jesus
they are commanded and enjoined.' 'To help thee in this, keep thine
eye much upon thine own base self, be clothed with humility, and
prefer thy brother before thyself; and know that Christianity
lieth not in small matters, neither before God nor understanding
men.' I have often said in my heart, what is the reason that some
of the brethren should be so shy of holding communion with those,
every whit as good, if not better than themselves? Is it because
they think themselves unworthy of their holy fellowship? No,
verily; it is because they exalt themselves.' p.538. He goes on to
declare that the difficulties which sin and Satan place in the way
of the Christian pilgrim ought never to be concealed. Salvation is
to be worked out with fear and trembling. It is only by divine
aid, by dependence upon our heavenly Father, that it can be
accomplished. 'To depart from iniquity to the utmost degree of
requirement, is a copy too fair for mortal flesh exactly to imitate,
while we are in this world. But with good paper, good ink, and
a good pen, a skilful and willing man may go far.' p. 546, 547.
Mr. Ryland's note on the Christian's trials is, 'when the love of
sin is subdued in the conscience, then peace will flow in like a
river, God will be glorified, Christ exalted; and the happy soul,
under the teachings and influence of the all-wise, omnipotent
Spirit, will experience sweet peace and joy in believing.' Millions
of pilgrims have entered the celestial city, having fought their
way to glory; and then, while singing the conqueror's song, all
their troubles by the way must have appeared as sufferings but
for a moment, which worked out for them an eternal and exceeding
weight of glory, And then how blessed the song to him that hath
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and made
us kings and priests unto our God. To him be glory and dominion
for ever and ever. Amen.--Geo. Offor.


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE FOLLOWING DISCOURSE

When I write of justification before God from the dreadful curse
of the law; then I must speak of nothing but grace, Christ, the
promise, and faith. But when I speak of our justification before
men then I must join to these good works. For grace, Christ, and
faith, are things invisible, and so not to be seen by another,
otherwise than through a life that becomes so blessed a gospel as
has declared unto us the remission of our sins for the sake of
Jesus Christ. He then that would have forgiveness of sins, and so be
delivered from the curse of God, must believe in the righteousness
and blood of Christ: but he that would shew to his neighbours
that he hath truly received this mercy of God, must do it by good
works; for all things else to them is but talk: as for example,
a tree is known to be what it is, to wit, whether of this or that
kind, by its fruit. A tree it is, without fruit, but as long as
it so abideth, there is ministered occasion to doubt what manner
of tree it is.

A professor is a professor, though he hath no good works; but
that, as such, he is truly godly, he is foolish that so concludeth.
(Matt. 7:17,18; James 2:18) Not that works makes a man good; for
the fruit maketh not a good tree, it is the principle, to wit,
Faith, that makes a man good, and his works that shew him to be
so. (Matt. 7:16; Luke 6:44)

What then? why all professors that have not good works flowing
from their faith are naught; are bramble bushes; are 'nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned.' (Heb. 6:8) For professors by
their fruitlessness declare that they are not of the planting of
God, nor the wheat, 'but tares and children of the wicked one.'
(Matt. 13:37, 38)

Not that faith needeth good works as an help to justification
before God. For in this matter faith will be ignorant of all good
works, except those done by the person of Christ. Here, then, the
good man 'worketh not, but believeth.' (Rom. 4:5). For he is not
now to carry to God, but to receive at his hand the matter of his
justification by faith; nor is the matter of his justification
before God ought else but the good deeds of another man, to wit,
Christ Jesus.

But is there, therefore, no need at all of good works, because a
man is justified before God without them? or can that be called
a justifying faith, that has not for its fruit good works? (Job
22:3; James 2:20, 26) Verily good works are necessary, though God
need them not; nor is that faith, as to justification with God,
worth a rush, that abideth alone, or without them.

There is, therefore, a twofold faith of Christ in the world, and
as to the notion of justifying righteousness, they both concur and
agree, but as to the manner of application, there they vastly differ.
The one, to wit, the non-saving faith, standeth in speculation
and naked knowledge of Christ, and so abideth idle: but the other
truly seeth and receives him, and so becometh fruitful. (John
1:12; Heb. 11:13; Rom. 10:16) And hence the true justifying faith
is said to receive, to embrace, to obey the Son of God, as tendered
in the gospel: by which expression is shewed both the nature of
justifying faith, in its actings in point of justification, and
also the cause of its being full of good works in the world. A
gift is not made mine by my seeing of it, or because I know the
nature of the thing so given; but then it is mine if I receive and
embrace it, yea, and as to the point in hand, if I yield myself
up to stand and fall by it. Now, he that shall not only see, but
receive, not only know, but embrace the Son of God, to be justified
by him, cannot but bring forth good works, because Christ who is
now received and embraced by faith, leavens and seasons the spirit
of this sinner, through his faith, to the making of him capable so
to be [justified].(Acts 15:9; Gen. 18:19; Heb. 11:11) Faith made
Sarah receive strength to conceive seed, and we are sanctified
through faith, which is in Christ. For faith hath joined Christ and
the soul together, and being so joined, the soul is one spirit
with him; not essentially, but in agreement and oneness of
design. Besides, when Christ is truly received and embraced to
the justifying of the sinner, in that man's heart he dwells by
his word and Spirit, through the same faith also. Now Christ by
his Spirit and word must needs season the soul he thus dwells in:
so then the soul being seasoned, it seasoneth the body; and body
and soul, the life and conversation.

We know it is not the seeing, but taking of a potion, that maketh
it work as it should, nor is the blood of Christ a purge to this
or that conscience, except received by faith. (Heb. 9:14)

Shall that then be counted right believing in Christ unto
justification, that amounts to no more than to an idle speculation,
or naked knowledge of him? shall that knowledge of him, I say,
be counted such, as only causes the soul to behold, but moveth it
not to good works? No, verily. For the true beholding of Jesus to
justification and life, changes from glory to glory. (2 Cor. 3:18)

Nor can that man that hath so believed, as that by his faith he
hath received and embraced Christ for life before God, be destitute
of good works: for, as I said, the word and Spirit comes also by
this faith, and dwells in the heart and conscience. Now, shall
a soul where the word and Spirit of Christ dwells, be a soul
without good works? Yea, shall a soul that has received the love,
the mercy, the kindness, grace and salvation of God through the
sorrows, tears, groans, cross, and cruel death of Christ, be yet
a fruitless tree! God forbid. This faith is as the salt which the
prophet cast into the spring of bitter water, it makes the soul
good and serviceable for ever. (2 Kings 2:19-22) If the receiving
of a temporal gift naturally tends to the making of us to move our
cap and knee, and binds us to be the servant of the giver, shall
we think that faith will leave him who by it has received Christ,
to be as unconcerned as a stock or stone, or that its utmost
excellency is to provoke the soul to a lip-labour, and to give
Christ a few fair words for his pains and grace, and so wrap up
the business? No, no; 'the love of Christ constraineth us' thus
to judge that it is but reasonable, since he gave his all for us,
that we should give our some for him. (2 Cor. 5:14,15)

Let no man, then, deceive himself, as he may and will if he takes
not heed with true notions, but examine himself concerning his
faith, to wit; Whether he hath any? and if some, Whether of that
kind that will turn to account in the day when God shall judge
the world.

I told you before that there is a twofold faith, and now I will
tell you that there are two sorts of good works; and a man may
be shrewdly guessed at with reference to his faith, even by the
works that he chooseth to be conversant in.

There are works that cost nothing, and works that are chargeable.
And observe it, the unsound faith will choose to itself the most
easy works it can find. For example, there is reading, praying,
hearing of sermons, baptism, breaking of bread, church fellowship,
preaching, and the like; and there is mortification of lusts,
charity, simplicity, open-heartedness, with a liberal hand to the
poor, and their like also. Now the unsound faith picks and chooses,
and takes and leaves, but the true faith does not so.

There are a great many professors now in England that have nothing
to distinguish them from the worst of men, but their praying,
reading, hearing of sermons, baptism, church-fellowship, and breaking
of bread. Separate them but from these, and everywhere else they
are as black as others, even in their whole life and conversation.
Thus they have chosen to them the most easy things to do them, but
love not to be conscionably found in the practice of the other;
a certain sign their faith is nought, and that these things, even
the things they are conversant in, are things attended to of them,
not for the ends for which God has appointed them, but to beguile
and undo themselves withal.

Praying, hearing, reading; for what are these things ordained,
but that we might by the godly use of them attain to more of the
knowledge of God, and be strengthened by his grace to serve him
better according to his moral law? Baptism, fellowship, and the
Lord's supper, are ordained for these ends also. But there is a
vast difference between using of these things, and a using of them
for these ends. A man may pray, yea pray for such things, had he
them, as would make him better in morals, without desire to be
better in morals, or love to the things he prays for. A man may
read and hear, not to learn to do, though to know; yea he may be
dead to doing moral goodness, and yet be great for reading and
hearing all his days. The people then among all professors that
are zealous of good works are the peculiar ones to Christ. (Titus
2:14) What has a man done that is baptized, if he pursues not
the ends for which that appointment was ordained. The like I say
of fellowship, of breaking of bread, etc.. For all these things
we should use to support our faith, to mortify the flesh, and
strengthen us to walk in newness of life by the rule of the moral
law. Nor can that man be esteemed holy whose life is tainted with
immoralities, let him be what he can in all things else. I am
of that man's mind as to practical righteousness, who said to
Christ upon this very question, 'Well, master, thou hast said the
truth;--for to love the Lord our God with all the heart, and with
all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the
strength, and to love his neighbour as himself, is more than all
whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices.' (Mark 12:28-33) To love
my neighbour as myself, to do as I would be done unto, this is
the law and the prophets. And he that is altogether a stranger to
these things, how dwelleth the love of God in him; or how will he
manifest to another that his faith will save him?

Satan is afraid that men should hear of justification by Christ,
lest they should embrace it. But yet, if he can prevail with them
to keep fingers off, though they do hear and look on, and practise
lesser things, he can the better bear it; yea, he will labour
to make such professors bold to conclude they shall by that kind
of faith enjoy him, though by that they cannot embrace him, nor
lay hold of him. For he knows that how far soever a man engages
in a profession of Christ with a faith that looks on, but cannot
receive nor embrace him, that faith will leave him to nothing but
mistaken and disappointments at last.

The gospel comes to some in word only, and the faith of such stands
but in a verbal sound; but the apostle was resolved not to know
or take notice of such a faith. (1 Thess. 1:4, 5) 'For the kingdom
of God, saith he, 'is not in word, but in power.' (1 Cor. 1:18-20)'
He whose faith stands only in a saying, I believe, has his works
in bare words also, and as virtual is the one as the other, and
both insignificant enough. 'If a brother or sister be naked, and
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in
peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not
those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?
Even so faith, if it hath not works is dead, being alone.' (James
2:15-17) This faith, therefore, Satan can allow, because it is
somewhat of kin to his own. (vs. 10)

Besides, what greater contempt can be cast upon Christ than by
such wordy professors is cast upon him? These are the men that by
practice say, the gospel is but an empty sound. Yet, the more they
profess, the louder they proclaim it thus to be, to his disgrace,
while they, not withstanding their profession of faith, hold and
maintain their league with the devil and sin. The Son of God was
manifest that he might destroy the works of the devil, but these
men profess his faith and keep these works alive in the world.
(1 John 3) Shall these pass for such as believe to the saving of
the soul? For a man to be content with this kind of faith, and to
look to go to salvation by it, what to God is a greater provocation?

The devil laugheth here, for he knows he has not lost his vassal
by such a faith as this, but that rather he hath made use of the
gospel, that glorious word of life, to secure his captive, through,
his presumption of the right faith, the faster in his shackles.

It is marvellous to me to see sin so high amidst the swarms of
professors that are found in every corner of this land. Nor can
any other reason be given for it, but because the gospel has lost
its wonted virtue, or because professors want faith therein. But
do you think it is because of the first? no, the word of our God
shall stand in its strength for ever; the faith of such therefore
is not right; they have for shields of gold, made themselves
shields of brass; or instead of the primitive faith, which was
of the operation of God, they have got to themselves a faith that
stands by the power, and in the wisdom of man. (2 Chron. 12:9, 10;
Col. 2:12; 1 Cor. 2:4, 5) And, to say no more to this, for what
is God so angry with this land, but for the sin of the professors
that dwell therein, while they have polluted his name with their
gifts, and with their idols? God, I say, has been provoked most
bitterly by us, while we have profaned his name, making use of
his name, his word, and ordinances, to serve ourselves, '0 Lord,
what wilt thou do to this land.' We are every one looking for
something; even for something that carrieth terror and dread in
the sound of its wings as it comes, though we know not the form
nor visage thereof.[1] One cries out, another has his hands upon
his loins, and a third is made mad with the sight of his eyes, and
with what his ears do hear. And as their faith hath served them
about justification, so it now serves them about repentance and
reformation: it can do nothing here neither; for though, as was
said, men cry out, and are with their hands upon their loins for
fear; yet, where is the church, the house, the man that stands in
the gap for the land, to turn away this wrath by repentance, and
amendment of life? Behold the Lord cometh forth out of his place,
and will come down and tread upon the places of the earth, and
the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be
cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured
down a steep place. But what is the cause of all this?--For the
transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the house
of Israel. (Micah 1:5)

It is that that is observed by them that can make observation,
that all that God has done to us already has been ineffectual as
to cause that humility and reformation, by which his judgments
must be turned away. Repentance is rare this day, and yet without
doubt, that without which, things will grow worse and worse. As
for them that hope that God will save his people, though but from
temporal judgments, whether they repent and reform, or do otherwise,
I must leave them and their opinions together: this I have found,
that sometimes the repentance, even of the godly, has come too
late to divert such judgments. And, how some of the godly should
be so indulged as to be saved from punishment without repentance,
when the true and unfeigned repentance of others will not deliver
them, leaves me, I confess, in a wilderness! But that which is most
of all to be lamented is, that sin, through custom, is become no
sin. The superfluity of naughtiness is at this day become no sin
with many. Surely this was the case with Israel, else how could
they say when the prophets so bitterly denounced God's judgments
against them, 'Because we are innocent, surely his anger shall
turn from us.' (Jer. 2:35) When custom or bad example has taken
away the conscience of sin, it is a sign that [that] soul is in
a dangerous lethargy; and yet this is the condition of the most
that profess amongst us this day. But to leave this and to proceed.

As there is a twofold faith, two sorts of good works, and the like,
so there is also a twofold love to Christ; the one standing, or
stopping, in some passions of the mind and affections; the other
is that which breaks through all difficulties to the holy commandment
to do it. Of both these there is mention made in the scripture;
and though all true love begins at the heart, yet that love is
but little set by that breaks not through to practice. How many
are there in the world that seem to have the first, but how few
shew the second. The young man in the gospel, (Mark 10:17) did
by his running, kneeling, crying, inquiring, and entreating of
Christ, to shew him the way to life, shew that he had inward love
to Christ and his own salvation; but yet it was not a love that
was 'strong as death,' 'cruel as the grave,' and hotter than the
coals of juniper. (Song 8:6) It was a love that stopped in mind
and affection, but could not break out into practice. This kind
of love, if it be let alone, and not pressed to proceed till it
comes into a labouring practising of the commandment, will love
as long as you will, to wit, as long as mouth and tongue can wag;
but yet you shall not, by all your skill drive this love farther
than the mouth; 'for with their mouth they shew much love, but
their heart goeth after their covetousness.' (Ezek. 33:31)

Nor may this love be counted for that of the right kind, because
it is in the heart, for the heart knows how to dissemble about
love, as much as about other matters. This is feigned love, or
love that pretends to dear affections for Christ, but can bestow
no cost upon him. Of this kind of love the world is full at this
day, especially the professors of this age; but as I said, of
this the Lord Jesus makes little or no account, for that it hath
in it an essential defectiveness. Thus, therefore, Christ and his
servants describe the love that is true and of the right kind,
and that with reference to himself and church.

First, with reference to himself. 'If a man love me,' saith he,
'he will keep my words.' (John 14:23) And again, 'He that hath
my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me.' And,
'He that loveth me not, keepeth not my sayings.' 'And the word
which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me.' Behold
you now where Christ placeth a sign of love, it is not in word
nor in tongue, not in great and seemingly affectionate gestures,
but in a practical walking in the law of the Lord. Hence such,
and such only, are called the undefiled in the way. You know who
says, 'I am the way.' 'Blessed,' saith David, 'are the undefiled
in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.' (Ps. 119:1)

But here again the hypocrite will give us the slip by betaking
himself to exterior matters, as to his 'mint and anise and cummin.'
(Matt. 23:23) Still neglecting the more weighty matters of the
law, to wit, judgment, mercy, faith; or else to the significative
ordinances, still neglecting to do to all men as he would
they should do to him. But let such know that God never ordained
significative ordinances, such as baptism, the Lord's supper, or
the like, for the sake of water, or of bread and wine; nor yet
because he takes any delight that we are dipped in water, or eat
that bread; but they were ordained to minister to us by the aptness
of the elements, through our sincere partaking of them, further
knowledge of the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, and of
our death and resurrection by him to newness of life. Wherefore,
he that eateth and believeth not, and he that is baptized, and
is not dead to sin, and walketh not in newness of life, neither
keepeth these ordinances nor pleaseth God. Now to be dead to sin,
is to be dead to those things forbidden in the moral law. For sin
is the transgression of that, and it availeth not to vaunt that
I am a saint and under this or that significative ordinance, if
I live in' the transgression of the law.'(1 John 3:4) For I am
convicted of the law as a transgressor, and so concluded to be one
that loveth not Christ, though I make a noise of my obedience to
Christ, and of my partaking of his significative ordinances. The
Jews of old made a great noise with their significative ordinances,
while they lived in the breach of the moral law, but their practice
of significative ordinances could not save them from the judgment
and displeasure of their God. They could frequent the temple, keep
their feasts, slay their sacrifices, and be mighty apt about all
their significative things. But they loved idols, and lived in the
breach of the second table of the law: wherefore God cast them out
of his presence: hark what the prophet saith of them, (Amos 4:4)
'Come to Bethel, and transgress; at Gilgal multiply transgression;
and bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes after
three years: and offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven,
and proclaim and publish the free-will offerings: for this liketh
you, 0 ye children of Israel, saith the Lord God.' Thus, as I
said, the hypocrite gives us the slip; for when he heareth that
love is in the keeping of the commandments of God, then he betakes
him to the more external parts of worship, and neglecteth the more
weighty matters to the provoking of the God of Israel.

Second, As love to God is shewed by keeping of his commandments;
so love to my neighbour, is the keeping of the commandments of
God likewise. 'By this we know that we love the children of God,
when we love God, and keep his commandments. For this is the love
of God,'--in us, both to God and man, 'that we keep his commandments:
and his commandments are not grievous.' (1 John 5:2, 3) He that
keepeth not God's commandments, loves neither God nor men.

Thus then we must learn to love one another. He that keepeth God's
commandment, doth to his brother what is right, for that is God's
commandment. He that keeps God's commandment, doth to his brother
even as he would be done unto himself, for that is God's commandment.
He that keeps God's commandment, shutteth not up his bowels of
compassion from him, for the contrary is his commandment. Further,
he that keepeth God's commandment sheweth his brother what he must
do to honour the Christ that he professeth, aright: therefore, he
that keeps the commandment, loves his brother. Yea, the keeping
of the commandment is loving the brethren.

But if all love, which we pretend to have one to another, were
tried by this one text, how much of that that we call so, would
be found to be nothing less? Preposterous are our spirits in all
things, nor can they be guided right, but by the word and Spirit
of God; the which, the good Lord grant unto us plentifully, that
we may do that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Yea, and that there may, by them, be wrought
sound repentance in us for all that hath been done by us amiss,
lest he give 'Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers;' for
that they have sinned against him by not walking in his ways, and
by not being obedient to his law. (Isa. 42:24)

Let me add, lest God doth not only punish us in the sight, and by
the hand of the wicked; but embolden them to say, it was God that
set them on; yea, lest they make those sins of ours, which we
have not repented of, not only their bye-word against us to after
generations, but the argument, one to another, of their justification
for all the evil that they shall be suffered to do unto us: saying,
when men shall ask them, 'Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto
this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger?' (Deut.
29:24; 1 Kings 9:8; Jer. 22:8) 'Even because they have forsaken
the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, and walked not in
his ways.'

JOHN BUNYAN



A HOLY LIFE THE BEAUTY OF CHRISTIANITY

'AND, LET EVERY ONE THAT NAMETH THE NAME OF CHRIST DEPART FROM
INIQUITY,--2 TIM. 2:19

TIMOTHY, unto whom this epistle was writ, was an evangelist, that
is, inferior to apostles and extra-ordinary prophets, and above
ordinary pastors and teachers. (2 Tim. 4:5; Eph. 4:11) And he
with the rest of those under his circumstances was to go with the
apostles hither and thither, to be disposed of by them as they saw
need, for the further edification of those who by the apostolical
ministry were converted to the faith: and hence it is, that Titus
was left at Crete, and that this Timothy was left at Ephesus. (1
Tim. 1:3) For they were to do a work for Christ in the world,
which the apostles were to begin, and leave upon their hands to
finish. Now when the apostles departed from places, and had left
these evangelists in their stead, usually there did arise some
bad spirits among those people, where these were left for the
furtherance of the faith. This is manifest by both the epistles
to Timothy, and also by that to Titus: wherefore Paul, upon whom
these two evangelists waited for the fulfilling of their ministry,
writeth unto them while they abode where he left them, concerning
those turbulent spirits which they met with, and to teach them how
yet further they ought to behave themselves in the house of God,
which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground
of truth. And to this purpose he gives them, severally, divers
instructions, as the judicious reader may easily understand, by
which he encourageth them to the prosecution of that service which
for Christ they had to do for those people where he had left them,
and also instructeth them how to carry it towards their disturbers,
which last he doth, not only doctrinally, but also by shewing
them, by his example and practice, what he would have them do.

This done, he laboureth to comfort Timothy with the remembrance
of the steadfastness of God's eternal decree of election, because
grounded on his foreknowledge; saying, though Hymeneus and Philetus
have erred from the faith, and, by their fall, have overthrown the
faith of some, 'Yet the foundation of God standeth sure, having
this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his.' Now lest this
last hint should still encourage some to be remiss and carnally
secure, and foolish, as I suppose this doctrine abused, had
encouraged them to be before; therefore the apostle immediately
conjoineth to it this exhortation; 'And, let every one that nameth;
the name of Christ depart from iniquity.' Two truths strangely,
but necessarily joined together, because so apt to be severed by
the children of men; for many, under the pretence of their being
elected, neglect to pursue holiness; and many of them again that
pretend to be for holiness, quite exclude the doctrine and motives
that election gives thereto. Wherefore the apostle, that he might
set men's notions as to these things right, he joins these two
together, signifying thereby, that as electing love doth instate
a man in the blessing of eternal life; so holiness is the path
thereto; and, that he that refuseth to depart from iniquity shall
be dammed; notwithstanding he may think himself secured from hell
by the act of God's electing love. For election designeth men not
only to eternal glory, but to holiness of life, a means, thereto.
(Eph. 1:4, 5) And the manner of this connection of truth is the
more to be noted by us, because the apostle seems to conjoin[2]
them, in an holy heat of spirit, saying, 'The foundation of God
standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are
his.' And, 'let every one that shall but so much as name the name
of Christ, depart from iniquity;' or, as who should say, God will
be revenged upon them for all, or, notwithstanding, they appropriate
unto themselves the benefits of election.

In the text we have, FIRST, An exhortation. SECOND, The extension
of that exhortation. The exhortation is, That men depart from
iniquity. The extension of it is, to them, all of them, every
one of them that name the name of Christ. 'And let every one that
nameth the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.'


[FIRST, THE EXHORTATION--THAT MEN DEPART FROM INIQUITY]

In the exhortation there are several things to be taken notice of,
because insinuated by the apostle. The first is, that iniquity is
a very dangerous and hurtful thing, as to the souls of sinners in
general; so to them that name the name of Christ.

First, Iniquity is a very dangerous and hurtful thing to men in
general; for it is that which did captivate the world at the
beginning, and that made it a bond-slave to the devil. It has also
done great hurt to mankind ever since. To instance a few things:

1. It is that which hath stupefied and besotted the powers of
men's souls, and made them even next to a beast and brute in all
matters supernatural heavenly. (2 Peter 2:12) For as the beast
minds nothing but his lusts and his belly, by nature, so man minds
nothing but things earthly, sensual, and devilish, by reason of
iniquity.

2. It has blinded and darkened the powers of the soul, so that
it can neither see where it is, nor which is the way out of this
besotted condition. (Eph. 4:18)

3. It has hardened the heart against God, and against all admonition
and counsel in the things of the gospel of Christ. (Rom. 2:5)

4. It has alienated the will, the mind, and affections, from the
choice of the things that should save it, and wrought them over
to an hearty delight in those things that naturally tend to drown
it in perdition and destruction. (Col. 1:21)

5. It has made man odious in God's eyes, it has provoked the
justice of God against him, and made him obnoxious to hell-fire.
(Ezek. 16:5)

6. Yea, it so holds him, so binds him, so reserves him to this,
that not he himself, nor yet all the angels of heaven, can deliver
him from this deplorable condition. (Prov. 5:22)

7. To say nothing of their pleasure and delight that it makes him
take in that way to hell in which he walketh. (Isa. 66:3; Prov.
7:22, 23) Never went fat ox so gamesomely to the shambles, nor
fool so merrily to the correction of the stocks, nor silly bird
so wantonly to the hidden net, as iniquity makes men go down her
steps to the pit of hell and damnation. O it is amazing, it is
astonishing to consider what hurt sin hath done to man, and into
how many dangers it has brought him; but let these few hints at
this time suffice as to this. I will now speak a word to the other
particular, namely,

Second, That as iniquity is dangerous and hurtful to the souls of
men in general, so it is to them that name the name of Christ. As
to the so and so naming of him, to that I shall speak by and by,
but at this time take it thus: That religiously name his name.
And I say iniquity is hurtful to them.

1. It plucks many a one of them from Christ and the religious
profession of him. I have even seen, that men who have devoutly and
religiously professed Jesus Christ, have been prevailed withal,
by iniquity, to cast him and the profession of his name quite
off, and to turn their backs upon him. 'Israel,' saith the prophet,
'hath cast off the thing that is good.' (Hosea 8:3) But why? 'Of
their silver and their gold have they made them idols.' The sin of
idolatry threw their hearts from God; their love to that iniquity
made them turn their backs upon him. Wherefore God complains,
that of forwardness to their iniquity, and through the prevalence
thereof, they had cast him behind their back. (Ezek. 23:35)

2. As it plucks many a professor from Christ, so it keeps many a
one from an effectual closing with him. How many are there that
religiously profess and make mention of the name of Christ, that
yet of love to, and by the interest that iniquity hath in their
affections, never close with him unto salvation, but are like
to them, of whom you read in Paul to Timothy, that they are ever
learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. (2
Tim. 3:1-7)

3. And concerning those that have indeed come to him, and that
have effectually closed with him, and that name his name to good
purpose; yet how hath iniquity hurt and abused many of them. (1.)
It has prevailed with God to hide his face from them, a thing more
bitter than death. (2.) It has prevailed with God to chastise, and
to afflict them sorely, a thing in which he taketh no pleasure.
(Lam 3:33) (3.) It has provoked God to give them over to the hand
of the enemy, and to deliver them to the tormentors. (Jer. 12:7;
Matt. 18:34) (4.) It hath brought them to question their interest
in Christ, and whether they ever had grace in their souls. (Psa.
31:22) (5.) And for those that have yet believed they were in his
favour, this iniquity hath driven them to fear that God would cast
them away, and take all his good things from them. (Psa. 51)

Yea, he that would know the hurt that iniquity hath done to them
that name the name of Christ, let him consider the cries, the sighs,
the tears, the bemoanings, the bewailings, the lamentations, the
sorrows, the confessions, the repentings and griefs wherewith they
have been attended, while they have complained that they have been
put in the stocks, laid in the dungeon, had their bones broken,
suffered the terrors of God, been distressed almost to distraction,
and have been fed with gravel, gall, wormwood, and with the water
of astonishment, for days, yea, years together. (Job 13:27; Psa.
6:6; Psa. 31:9, 10; Psa. 38:8; Psa. 60:3; Psa. 88; Psa. 116:3;
Jer. 8:14; Jer. 23:15; Jer. 31:18; Lam. 3:4, 16; Ezek. 4:16; 2
Cor. 12:21) By all which, and many more which might be mentioned,
it appears that iniquity is a dangerous and hurtful thing.


[SECOND, THE EXTENSION OF THE EXHORTATION--TO EVERY ONE THAT NAMETH
THE NAME OF CHRIST.]

But I proceed, and come in the next place to the extension of the
exhortation, namely, that it reacheth to all those that name the
name of Christ. 'And let every one that nameth the name of Christ
depart from iniquity.'

To handle this a little, and to shew you what the apostle here
means by naming of the name of Christ: he meaneth not an irreligious
naming of that worthy name, nor those that name it irreligiously.
This is evident, because he passeth by their manner of naming of
it without the least reproof, the which he would not have done had
the fault been in their manner of naming of the name of Christ.
Now I say, if he intendeth not those that name the name of Christ
irreligiously, then, though the exhortation, 'let every one,' seems
to extend itself to all, and all manner of persons, that any ways
name the name of Christ, yet it is limited by this, to wit, that
rightly, religiously, or according to the way of the professors
of Christ, name his worthy name. And it must needs be so taken,
and that for these reasons:

First, For that, as I said before, the apostle taketh no notice of
their manner of naming of his name, so as to reprove any indecency
or unseemliness in their naming of him; wherefore he alloweth of
the manner of their naming of him.

Secondly, because the apostle's design in this exhortation was,
and is, that the naming of the name of Christ might be accompanied
with such a life of holiness as might put an additional lustre
upon that name whenever named in a religious way; but this cannot
be applied to every manner of naming the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. For if a man shall name the name of Christ unduly, or
irreligiously, though he shall never so much therewithal depart
from iniquity, and be circumspect to the utmost in all civility
and morality, yet he answers not the apostle's end, which he seeks
by this his exhortation. For,

1. Suppose a man should name the name of Christ vainly, idly, in
vain mirth, wantonness, false or vain swearing, or the like, and
shall back this, his manner of naming the name of Christ, with
all manner of justness and uprightness of life, would this answer
the apostle's end in this his exhortation? Verily no; for this
manner of naming the name is worthy reprehension; 'Thou shalt
not take my name in vain,' or vainly make use thereof: and moral
goodness attending the so-naming of the name of Christ will do
more hurt than good. (Ex. 20)

2. There is a reproachful and scandalous naming of the name of
Christ, such as the Jews and Pharisees did accustom themselves
unto, as to call him Jesus, the deceiver; and Christ, in a way
of scorn and contempt. Nor were these men quite destitute of that
which put a lustre upon their opinions; for, said the Lord Christ
himself unto them, 'Ye indeed appear beautiful outward.' (Matt.
23:27)

3. There is such a naming of the name of Christ as to make it
a cloak for false and dangerous errors: that men, by the use of
that name, and the putting of it upon such errors and delusions,
may put off their errors to others the better. 'Many shall come
in my name, to wit, with their delusions, presenting them, in my
name, to the world, and shall put them off, in my name, to the
destruction of the soul. (Matt. 24:5) Now, can any imagine that
the apostle should extend his exhortation to such, that they,
thus continuing to name the name of Christ, should depart from
iniquity. To what end should such be comprehended in this of
exhortation of his? to no purpose at all: for the more an erroneous
person, or a deceiver of souls, shall back his errors with a
life that is morally good, the more mischievous, dangerous, and
damnable is that man and his delusions; wherefore such a one is
not concerned in this exhortation.

4. There is a naming of the name of Christ magically, and after
the manner of exorcism, or, conjuration; as we read in the Acts of
the apostles. vagabond Jews, the exorcists, there say, 'We adjure
you by Jesus, whom Paul preacheth.' (Acts 19:13-15) Thus they
called over them that had evil spirits, the name of the Lord
Jesus. But what if these should clothe this, their devilish art,
and devilish way, of using or naming of the name of the Lord
Jesus, with departing from iniquity, so as to commend their whole
life to by-standers, for such: as is morally good: what advantage
would Christ, or Paul, or the gospel, get thereby? verily none at
all; but rather damage and reproach, as will soon appear to any
man's reason, if it be considered that goodness of life, joined
to badness of principles is like the devil clothed in white, or
Satan transformed into an angel of light. And Paul was grieved
in his spirit, when the wench that had a spirit of divination did
acknowledge him to be the servant of the most high God, for he
knew it would nothing further, or help forward, the Lord's design,
but be rather an hinderance thereto. For when witches and devils
come once to commend, or make use of the name of Christ, Christ
and Paul like it not; therefore Paul's exhortation, which here
are presented with by the text, is not extended to any of the four
sorts aforenamed, but,

Third, To those upon whom his name is called, they should depart
from iniquity. I say those whom God has so far dignified, as to
put the name of Christ upon them. (Acts 15:17) And I will add, that
apply that name to themselves. And the reason is, because God is
now concerned. (ch. 11:26) God has changed thy name from Pagan to
Christian, and thou choosest to call thyself by that name, saying,
'I belong to Christ.' Now thou must depart from iniquity, for that
notice is taken of thee, both by heaven and earth, that thou art
become a disciple, and 'let every one that' so 'nameth the name
of Christ,' or that nameth it, being himself by God and himself
put under such circumstances as these, 'depart from iniquity.' (1
Peter 4:16)

Fourthly, It is spoken to those that name the name of Christ
either in the public or private worship of God, being themselves
professed worshippers of him; and the reason is, for that the
ordinances, as well as the name of God, is holy, and 'he will be
sanctified in them that come nigh him.' (Lev. 10:3) He therefore
that approacheth the presence of Christ in prayer, or any other
divine appointment, must take heed of regarding 'iniquity in
his heart.' (Psa. 66:18) Else the Lord will stop his ears to his
prayers, and will shut his eyes, and not take notice of such kind
of worship or worshippers.

Fifthly, Those that the apostle in this place exhorts to depart
from iniquity are such as have taken unto themselves the boldness
to say, that they are in him, abide in him, and consequently are
made partakers of the benefits that are in him. 'He that saith he
abideth in him, ought himself also to walk, even as he walked.'
(1 John 2:6) And the reason is, because Christ is a fruitful root,
and a free conveyer of sap into the branches; hence it is written,
that 'the trees of the Lord are full of sap.' (Psa. 104:16) So then,
he that nameth the name of Christ by way of applying to himself
his benefits, and as counting that he is found of God in him, and
so abideth, ought himself to walk even as he walked, that he may
give proof of what he saith to be true, by bearing forth before
men that similitude of righteousness that is in his root and stem:
for such as the stock or tree is, such let the branches be, but
that cannot be known but by the fruit: 'ye shall know them by
their fruit.' (Matt. 7:16) So then, he that thus shall name the
name of Christ, let him depart from iniquity: yea, let every such
man do so.

Sixthly, This exhortation is spoken to them that name Christ as
their Sovereign Lord and King: let them 'depart from iniquity.'
'The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our
King; he will save us.' (Isa. 33:22) [These] are great words; and
as they cannot be spoken by every one, so they ought not to be
spoken lightly by them that can. Nor may he that claims so high a
privilege be but obedient, submissive, apt to learn, conscientiously
to put in practice what he hath learnt of his Judge, his Lawgiver,
and his King. Lest when some shall hear him say that Christ, by
name, is his Lawgiver and his King, and shall yet observe him to
do things evil, and to walk in ways that are not good, they shall
think evil, and speak so of his King; saying, Learnt you this of
Christ your King? or doth your King countenance you in ways that
are so bad? or, do you by thus and thus doing submit to the laws
of your king? yea, your King, his name and gospel shall bear the
burden of the evil, together with the shame thereof, if thou that
namest the name of Christ shalt not depart from iniquity.

Lastly, Whatever man he be that by his naming of the name of Christ
shall intimate that he hath any reverence of love to, or delight
in that Christ, whose name he nameth, that man should depart from
iniquity, not only for the reasons that are above mentioned, but
for those that may be named afterwards.

But having thus far opened the word, and shewed who and what manner
of man the apostle had in his eye, in this his exhortation, I
shall come, in the next place, to make some observations upon the
text. As,


[OBSERVATION FIRST.]

That it is incident to men to name the name of Christ religiously,
that is, rightly as to words and nations, and not to 'depart from
iniquity.' This was the occasion of this exhortation, for Paul saw
that there were some that did so; to wit, that named the name of
Christ well, as to words, but did not depart from iniquity. Some
such he also I found among them at Corinth, which made him say,
'Awake to righteousness, and sin not.' (1 Cor. 15:34) He found
such at Ephesus, and cries out to them most earnestly, saying,
'Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead.' (Eph. 5:14)
For albeit they were professors of Christ, yet they lived too much
like those that were dead in trespasses and sins, This he also
found among the Hebrews, wherefore he saith to them, 'Let us lay
aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and
let us run with patience the race that is set before us.' (Heb.
12:1) These professors are easily beset with sin, yea, it did hang
upon them as weights to hinder them from making of that profession
of Christ, whose name they named, as beautiful as did become both
him and them.

In my discourse upon this subject, I must endeavour to shew you
two things. FIRST, What Paul means when he saith, 'depart from
iniquity.' SECONDLY, Why some, that as to words, rightly name the
name of Christ, do not 'depart from iniquity.'

The first of those doth need some explanation, because in some
sense even the best of saints cannot depart from sin, or iniquity.

1. Because as to the being of it, it is seated and rooted in their
flesh, and hath its dwelling there. Yea, it hath, and so will
have an abiding there, so long as man is on this side that state
of perfection, which is not to be enjoyed while we are in the
flesh: 'for in me, that is, in my flesh,' sin dwells, (Rom. 7:18)
nor doth any thing else but sin dwell there: 'for in me, that is,
in my flesh, said Paul, 'dwelleth no good thing:' therefore the
apostle must not be understood as if he intended to insinuate that
there was a possibility that the nature and being of sin could be
plucked up by the roots, and so cast clean away from us, as to
the very nature thereof. No, that will abide with us, for it hath
its dwelling in us.

2. And as they cannot depart from the nature, of it as such, that
is, as they cannot be rid of the being of sin, so neither can they
depart from the motions and stirrings of sin, no more than they
can stir from the motions or stirrings of their natural senses,
or of their natural reason: the motions of sin, which Paul also
calls the lusts thereof, will be where the nature and being of
sin is, because it is not dead; for that which liveth, what manner
of life soever it hath, will have motion according to the manner
of life which it hath; and sin being one of the most quick and
brisk things that are, it will also have its motions and lusts
accordingly. Hence Paul says, it lusts, and will lust, where it is
and dwells; though the very Spirit of God and the utmost diligence
of a Christian be also there to oppose it. (Rom. 6:12; Gal. 5:17)

3. Again, as the being and motions of sin will be with us, so also
will it in its endeavours. It will endeavour to overcome us, and
to make us captives to itself and to Satan; and these endeavours
will be with us. (Eph. 6:11, 12; 2 Cor. 10:5; Heb. 12:4) Nor can
we so depart from iniquity, as to be utterly rid of all sense and
feeling of what endeavours there are in sin and iniquity to be
master and lord, and reign. Sin will endeavour to defile the mind,
to defile the conscience, to defile the life and conversation;
and this endeavour, as endeavour, we cannot depart from; that is,
cause that it should not be in our flesh; for there it will be,
since sin in its being is there.

4. As the being, motions, and endeavours of sin will still abide
in our flesh, so consequently will its polluting fumes be upon us;
nor doth the apostle mean, when he bids us depart from iniquity,
that we should think that we can so be, or so do, in this life,
as that our being or doing should not smell of the strong scent
of sin. 'Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.'(
Job 14:4) 'We are all as an unclean thing, and' therefore 'all
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags.' (Isa. 64:6) The scent,
the smell, the rank and odious stink of sins abide upon, yea, and
will abide upon us, when most spiritual here, and upon our most
spiritual actions too, until they be taken away by Christ. Thus
far, therefore, we cannot be concerned in the exhortation. For
should Paul exhort us to depart from the being, motion, endeavour,
and polluting fumes and scent of sin--I mean so to depart from
them, as that there shall no such thing have place, or motion,
or striving, or scent in, or upon us--he would exhort us to that
which is altogether impossible for us to perform, yea, to perform
through that working of the Spirit of God, which is to be with
us and in us here. Yea, he must exhort us to that which be could
not perform himself. But such exhortations did not stand with the
wisdom of an apostle. Wherefore there is a certain meaning in this
exhortation, from the which if we swerve, we shall both wrong the
apostle and ourselves.

FIRST--Let us inquire then what Paul should mean, where he bids
them 'that name the name of Christ depart from iniquity.' And for
our better understanding of him, we must consider that there is
an iniquity that is inherent in us, and an iniquity that is apart,
and at a distance from us. Now if he means, as certainly he doth,
that they that name the name of Christ should depart from that
sin and iniquity that is in themselves; then, though he cannot
mean that we should separate that from our persons, for that is
impossible, yet he would have us,

First, Take off and withdraw our MINDS and AFFECTIONS therefrom.
And he tells us that they that are Christ's do so. 'And they that
are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts.' (Gal. 5:24) Sinful lusts and sinful motions our minds and
affections should depart from them. There are the affections and
lusts of sin; and there are the affections and lusts, or desires
of the soul; and again, there are the affections and lusts of the
new man in saints. Now this is that that the apostle would have,
to wit, that the affections and passions of our souls should not
choose but depart from the affections and lusts of our old man,
and should be renewed and made willing to be led by the Holy
Ghost from them. 'This I say,' says he, 'Walk in the Spirit, and
ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.' (ver. 16)

Wherefore, when he saith, depart from iniquity, if he means from
our own inherent iniquity, then he must mean thus, take your mind
and your affections off, carry your minds away from them, set
your minds and affections upon other objects, and let your minds
and affections be yielded up to the conduct of the word and Spirit
of God, 'Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof.' (Rom. 6:12) Now a man, in
mind and affections, may depart from that which yet will not depart
from him; yea, a man in mind may depart from that which yet will
dwell in him as long as he lives.

For instance, there are many diseases that cleave to men, from
which, in their minds, they willingly depart. Yea, their greatest
disquietment is, that so bad a distemper will abide by them,
and might they but have their desire accomplished, they would be
as far therefrom as the ends of the earth are asunder, and while
they are found to continue together, the mind departs therefrom,
and is gone either to God or to physicians for help and deliverance
from it.

And thus it is with the saint, and should be with every one that
by way of profession nameth the name of Christ, he should depart
from his indwelling sin, with his mind. 'With his mind he should
serve the law of God.' (Rom. 7:25) And this is an excellent thing
to do, and can be done by none but such as are possessed with
an excellent spirit. Ah! to find a man that really departs from
himself, and that draweth the affections of the soul, from the
affections and lusts of his flesh is rare thing. (Ezek. 11:19-21)
The heart of the most of professors goeth after their detestable
lusts, and after their inward abominations. But such shall of
the flesh reap corruption,' notwithstanding they name the name of
Christ. (Gal. 6:8)

Sin is sweet to him that is nothing but flesh, or that can savour
nothing but what is of the flesh. (Job 20:12) Nor can it be that
be that is such should depart from himself, his sweet self. (Rom.
8:5-8) No, they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the
flesh; wherefore they that are in the flesh, though they profess
religion and name the name of Christ, cannot please God; for
such, instead of walking in and after the Spirit, have put the
stumbling-block of their iniquity before their faces, to hinder
their departing therefrom. (Ezek. 14:7, 8) nor will all their
inquiring of God, nor their seeking and praying to him, keep them
from stumbling and falling, and splitting themselves in sunder
upon the rocks and ruins that are provided for them, as a reward
of the evil of their doings. (Job 14:16) Yea, they shall
suck the poison of asps, and the viper's tongue shall slay them,
notwithstanding all their profession.

Question. But some may say, how shall I know that I do depart from
the iniquity of my flesh, from the iniquity that is in me.

Answer. I shall answer this question briefly thus:

(1.) How is iniquity in thine eye, when severed from the guilt
and punishment that attends it? Is it as separate from these,
beauteous, or ill-favoured? I ask thee how it looks, and how thou
likest it, suppose there were no guilt or punishment to attend
thy love to, or commission of it? For if in its own nature it be
desirable to thy mind, and only therefore shunned for fear of the
punishment that attends the commission of it, without doubt thou
art none of them that do depart from it; all that thou dost is,
thou shunnest the sin, not of abhorrence of the sin, but for fear
of the punishment that attends it. Like the thief that yet refuseth
to take away his neighbour's horse, not of hatred of theft, but
for fear of the gallows.

(2.) How dost thou like thyself, as considered possessed with a
body of sin, and as feeling and finding that sin worketh in thy
members? doth this yield thee inward pleasedness of mind, and a
kind of secret sweetness, or bow? for to be sure, where a sanctified
mind is, there is nothing more; odious in itself, nor that makes
a man so in his own eyes, as doth this sight, the sight of sin in
him, of the working of lust in him. (Job 42:6; Ezek. 16:63; Rom.
6:12) It is this that makes the good man ashamed, that makes him
blush, and that makes him abhor himself.

(3.) How look thy duties in thine eyes, I mean thy duties which
thou doest in the service of God? I say, how look the best of
these, the most warm and spiritual of these, since not one of them
can be performed, but they do catch the stain of sin, as coming
from thee? or art thou through the ignorance that is in thee as
[one] unacquainted with these things?

(4.) Why wouldst thou go to heaven? Is it because thou wouldst be
saved from hell, or because thou wouldst be freed from sin? I say,
wouldst thou go to heaven, because it is a place that is holy, or
because it is a place remote from the pains of hell? I ask again,
wherein dost thou think the blessedness of heaven consists? is
it in the holiness that is there, or in the freedom that is there
from hell? There is not a man alive but would go to heaven, that
he may be saved from hell: but how many would go thither that they
might be saved from the pleasures of sin, from the inward pleasure
of sin; of that I will be silent, though surely they are those
that are out of love with sin, and that do depart from iniquity.

Verily, my brethren, it is a great thing to depart from iniquity;
it is a great thing to have my will, my mind, and my affections
departing from it. But,

Second, As they that depart from iniquity withdraw their minds and
affections from the lusts and motions of it, so they depart also
from the OCCASIONS of it; there are occasions by which sin worketh
to bring forth the fruits thereof, and some seek those occasions.
(Rom. 14:13; 1 Tim. 5:4; Ex. 23:7; Prov. 5:8; 2 Tim. 2:16) But
he that hath set himself to depart from sin in himself, will not
seek occasions from abroad to do it. Such a man as will keep far
from an evil matter will not company with a person that pollutes
and defiles, nor will he come near the door of the adulteress's
house; he will shun profane and vain babbling, for fear of the
ungodliness that attends it; he will walk with wise men that he may
be wise, knowing that 'a companion of fools shall be destroyed.'
(Prov. 13:20)

Now there are occasions given and occasions taken to sin against
the Lord Jesus; but he that departeth from iniquity departeth from
them both. He is not for giving any occasion to others to sin; he
had rather wrong himself and put up with injuries done, than give
occasion to others to do iniquity; and as he is for giving none,
so neither is he for taking any: he is for partaking of no man's
sins, but for keeping of himself pure. (1 Tim. 5:22)

Third, To depart from iniquity, is to depart from it in those
EXAMPLES that are set before us thereto: occasions and examples
are sometimes the same, but there may be occasions to sin where
there are no examples thereto, and therefore in that they differ.
And to depart from iniquity is to shun and depart from those
examples, those beastly examples, that in every corner of the
country present themselves to men.

Examples to drunkenness; examples to whoredom; examples to
swearing, to lying, to stealing, to sabbath-breaking, to pride,
to covetousness, to deceit, to hypocrisy, and to what not, are
now-a-days common among men, and he that is to seek in this matter,
and that know not how to be expertly base, may have patterns and
examples thereto in every hole. But to depart from iniquity is
to depart from sinful examples, to shut the eyes at them, to turn
the back upon them, and to cry out to heaven for grace to be kept
in the path of life. And, 'Let every one that nameth the name of
Christ depart from iniquity.'

Fourth, To depart from iniquity is to depart from the ENTICINGS
of iniquity. There is that in iniquity that is of an enticing
nature. Its pleasures, profits, honours, delights, and sweetnesses
are enticing, and he that hankers after these is not departed nor
departing from iniquity. A man must be weaned from these things,
and must find some things somewhere else that are better than
these, else he cannot depart from iniquity.

Question. But some may say, I go from it and it follows me; I
reject it and it returns upon me; I have said it nay, a thousand
times, and yet it offereth itself and its deceits to me again,
what would you have me do?

Answer. I would answer thus; Departing from iniquity is not a
work of an hour, or a day, or a week, or a month, or a year; but
it is a work that will last thee thy lifetime, and there is the
greatness and difficulty of it: were it to be done presently, or
were the work to be quickly over, how many are there that would
be found to have departed from iniquity; but for that it is a work
of continuance, and not worth anything, unless men hold out to the
end, therefore it is that so few are found actors or overcomers
therein. Departing from iniquity, with many, is but like the
falling out of two neighbours, they hate one another for a while,
and then renew their old friendship again.

But again, since to depart from iniquity is a work of time--of all
thy time, no wonder if it dogs thee, and offereth to return upon
thee again and again; for THAT is mischievous, and seeks nothing
less than thy ruin: wherefore thou must, in the first place, take
it for granted that thus it will be and so cry the harder to God
for the continuing of his presence and grace upon thee in this
blessed work, that as thou hast begun to call upon the name of
the Lord Jesus, and begun to depart from iniquity, so thou mayest
have strength to do it to the last gasp of thy life.

And further, for that departing from iniquity is a kind of a
warfare with it, for iniquity will hang in thy flesh what it can,
and will not be easily kept under; therefore no marvel if thou
find it wearisome work, and that the thing that thou wouldest be
rid of, is so unwilling to let thee depart from it.

And since the work is so weighty, and that it makes thee to go
groaning on, I will for thy help give thee here a few things to
consider of: and [remember],

1. Remember that God sees thee, and has his eyes open upon thee,
even then when sin and temptation is lying at thee to give it some
entertainment. This was that that made Joseph depart from it, when
solicited to embrace it by a very powerful argument. (Gen. 34:6-7)

2. Remember that God's wrath burns against it, and that he will
surely be revenged on it, and on all that give it entertainment.
This made Job afraid to countenance it, and put him upon departing
from it; 'For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by
reason of his highness I could not endure.' (Job 31:23)

3. Remember the mischiefs that it has done to those that have
embraced it, and what distress it has brought upon others. This
made the whole congregation of Israel tremble to think that any
of their brethren should give countenance to it. (Josh. 22:16-18)

4. Remember what Christ hath suffered by it, that he might deliver
us from the power of it. This made Paul so heartily to depart from
it, and wish all Christians to do so as well as he. (2 Cor. 5:14)

5. Remember that those that are now in hell-fire went thither
for that they loved iniquity, and would not depart from it. (Psa.
9:17; 11:6)

6. Remember that a profession is not worth a pin, if they that
make it do not depart from iniquity. (James 2:16, 17)

7. Remember that thy death-bed will be very uneasy to thee, if
thy conscience at that day shall be clogged with the guilt of thy
iniquity. (Hosea 7:13, 14)

8. Remember that at the judgment-day Christ will say to those,
Depart from me, that have not here departed from their sin and
iniquity. (Luke 13:27; Matt. 25:41)

Lastly, Remember well, and think much upon what a blessed reward
the Son of God will give unto them at that day that have joined
to their profession of faith in him a holy and blessed conversation.

Having thus briefly showed you these things, I shall come in the
next place,

SECOND, To show you, why some, that as to words rightly name the
name of Christ, do not depart from iniquity. That it is incident
to men to name the name of Christ religiously, and not to depart
from iniquity, I have proved already, and now I must show you why
it is so, and the reasons are of three sorts:

First, Some profess him, yet have not saving faith in him, nor
yet received grace from him. That some profess him that have not
faith in him, nor received grace from him, I will make appear
first; and then that they do not depart from iniquity, shall be
shown afterwards.

That the first is true consider, Christ says to his disciples,
'There are some of you that believe not.' And again, 'For Jesus
knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and who
should betray him.' (John 4:64) Now if they believe not, they have
none of his grace in them; for faith is the first and head grace,
the beginning and leading grace; he, therefore, that is destitute
of that is empty of all the rest. Besides, other scriptures also
confirm this truth. James calls I some of the professors of Christ
that were in his day vain or empty men. (James 2:20) That is, men
void of grace. And the apostle suggesteth in the very words below
the text, that as in God's house there are golden and silver saints,
so there are also earthy and wooden ones. For 'in a great house'
as God's is, 'are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also
of wood and of earth, and some to honour, and some to dishonour.'
(2 Tim 2:20) That is, some for heaven and some for hell. (Rom 9:
20-23)

Now they are these wooden and earthy professors that he aimeth
at in the text; to wit, that they should depart from iniquity, or
else their profession would do them no good, and these also that
he despaireth of in the next words, saying, But in this great
house of God there will not only be golden and silver Christians,
but wooden and earthly ones: And if any man purge himself from
these, from these men's companies, and from these men's vices, he
shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified, and meet for the master's
use, and prepared to every good work. From all which it is
gathered that there are some that name the name of Christ in a
way of profession, that have neither faith nor grace in them, and
so, consequently, that do not depart from iniquity. For,

These want that principle, that holy and blessed principle, that
should induce them thereunto; to wit, the great and principal
graces of the Spirit, and they are four.

1. As I have said, they want FAITH, that heart-purifying grace,
for the heart is purified by faith. (Acts 15:9) I have showed you
already that departing from iniquity must be with the mind and
affections, or with the heart. But how can that be, where the
heart is not sanctified and made holy? For, an unsanctified mind
cannot depart from iniquity, no more than the Ethiopian can change
his skin. (Jer. 13:3) But nothing can purify the heart but faith.
Therefore nothing can make a professor depart from iniquity where
faith is wanting. So then, when men professedly name the name of
Christ without having holy faith in him, they still abide by their
iniquity; they depart not from their iniquity, but rather make
of their profession a cloak for their iniquity, for their malice,
and for their covetousness, and the like. (1 Thess 2:15; 1 Peter
2:16) It is not profession, but faith, that bringeth God and the
soul together; and as long as God and the soul are at a distance,
whatever profession is made, there is not a departing, not
an heart-departing from iniquity. Wherefore to these professors
James writeth thus, 'Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners: and purify your hearts,
ye double-minded.' (James 4:8) Men, far from God, cannot think
reverently of him, nor so speak and profess him, as standeth with
the nature of gospel religion; wherefore God saith, draw near
hither, that is by faith; and again, 'let them come near, then
let them speak,' then let them profess. (Isa 41:1) Without faith
a man cannot please God, because he cannot without it stand before
him in the spotless righteousness of Christ, nor yet depart from
iniquity, and live a holy life. (Heb 11:6)

There are three things in faith, that directly tend to make a man
depart from iniquity. (l.) It apprehendeth the truth of the being
and greatness of God, and so it aweth the spirit of a man. (2.) It
apprehendeth the love of this God in Christ, and so it conquereth
and overcometh the spirit of a man. (3.) It apprehendeth the
sweetness and blessedness of the nature of the Godhead, and thence
persuadeth the soul to desire here, communion with him, that it
may be holy, and the enjoyment of him, when this world is ended,
that it may be happy in, and by him, for ever.

But without faith these things cannot be apprehended, and therefore
those that want it, whatever; their profession is, they will not
depart from iniquity.

2. [They want REPENTANCE.] Repentance is another of the great
and principal graces which the Holy Ghost worketh in the heart.
Wherefore, without this also there can be no departing from iniquity.
It is in vain to expect it of any man, let his profession be never
so stately and great, if he is a stranger to sound repentance. How
many are there in our day, since the gospel is grown so common,
that catch up a notion of good things and from that notion make
a profession of the name of Christ, get into churches, and obtain
the title of a brother, a saint, a member of a gospel congregation,
that have clean escaped repentance. I say, they have catched up
a notion of good things, and have through that adventured to name
the name of Christ, quite forgetting to take repentance with them.
Repentance should be, and is one of the first steps into the true
gospel profession. (Mark 1:15; Prov 3:7; 16:6) But some know nothing
of it, until they come to the end of all, and their repentance
will do them no good. Repentance is not but where the true fear
of God is; yea, the fear of God is one ground of repentance.
Repentance is the scouring grace, it is that which purges. Repentance
is, as I may call it, that bitter pill without the taking, and
sound working of which, base and sinful humours will rest unstirred,
unpurged, undriven out of the soul. Can repentance be where godly
sorrow is not? or can repentance be where the fruits of repentance
are not? O the fruits of repentance, thick sown by preachers, but
it comes up but thinly! (Mark 1:4,5; Rom 6:21; Jer 7:3,5) Where
shall the fruits of repentance be found? Confession of sin is one
fruit of repentance; shame for sin is another fruit of repentance;
amendment of life is another fruit of repentance; restitution
for couzening, cheating, defrauding, beguiling thy neighbour, is
another fruit of repentance. (Luke 19:5-8) Yea, if you would see
the fruits of repentance as described by the Holy Ghost, and put
together for the further conviction and shame of the impenitent
professor, look into the second epistle to the Corinthians, 12:9-11.

But this is a day that was never read of, a day wherein conversion
is frequent without repentance; such a conversion as it is, and
therefore doth the church of God now swarm with them that religiously
name the name of Christ, and yet depart not from iniquity. Alas!
all houses, all tables, all shops, have hanging up in them the
sign of the want of repentance. (Eccl 7:27,28) To say nothing of
the talk, of the beds and the backs of most that profess, by which
of these is it that one of a thousand for men; and for women,
one of ten thousand, do show that they have repentance? No marvel
then that the name of Christ is so frequently mentioned there,
where iniquity dwells, yea, reigns, and that with the consent of
the mind.

I would not be austere, but were wearing of gold, putting on of
apparel, dressing up houses, decking of children, learning of
compliments, boldness in women, lechery in men, wanton behaviour,
lascivious words, and tempting carriages, signs of repentance;
then I must say, the fruits of repentance swarm in our land; but
if these be none of the fruits of repentance then, O, the multitude
of professors, that religiously name the name of Christ, and do
not depart from iniquity.[3] But,

3. [They want LOVE.] Love is another of those great and principal
graces which the Holy Ghost worketh in the heart; wherefore let
profession be never so high, yet if love be wanting there, to be
sure such professors 'depart not from iniquity,' (1 Cor 13) Hence
all profession, and subjecting to profession, are counted nothing,
where love is not. Love is counted a most infallible sign that a
man is in a state of salvation. 'He that loveth dwells in God, is
born of God, and knoweth him.' (1 John 4:7,16,21) Love divideth
itself, to God, and to my neighbour. Love to God is, that we
keep his sayings, his commandments, his laws. 'If a man love me,'
saith Christ, 'he will keep my words;--and he that loveth me not,
keepeth not my sayings.' (John 14:23,24) For this is the love of
God, that we keep his commandments: and his commandments are not
grievous.' (1 John 5:3) So then, that professor that hath not love,
cannot depart from iniquity. (l.) Where no love is, men cannot
be tender of the name of God, they are not afflicted because men
keep not God's law. (Psa 119:136; 1 Col 13:5) (2.) Where no love
is, men cannot deny themselves of that which otherwise they might
lawfully do, lest the weak should fall, and the world be destroyed.
(Rom 14:15) (3.) Where love to God is, there is hatred against
iniquity; 'ye that love the Lord, hate evil.' (Psa. 97:10)

A man cannot love God that loves not holiness; he loves not holiness
that loves not God's word; he loves not God's word that doth not
do it. It is a common thing to find men partial in God's law,
setting much by small things, and neglecting the weightier matters,
paying tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, and neglecting the
weightier matters. These turn the tables of God's book upside
down; making little laws of great ones; and great ones of little
ones; counting half an hour's bodily service better than a moral
life. Love! love is gone out of the country; love to the doctrine
of the first table, love to the doctrine of the second table. O
how many professors, in God's eyes, are accounted of no more than
sounding brass, for want of this ornament, love! (1 Cor 13)

To speak nothing of the first table, where is he that hath his
love manifested by the second? where are they that feed the hungry
and clothe the naked, and send portions to them, for whom nothing
is prepared? Where is Paul that would not eat meat while the world
standeth, lest he made his brother offend? (1 Cor 8:13) Where is
Dorcas, with her garments she used to make for the widow, and for
the fatherless? (Acts 9:36-39) Yea, where is that rich man that,
to his power, durst say as Job does? as recorded in Job 30:25;
31:13,32. Love! love is gone, and now coveting, pinching, griping,
and such things are in fashion: now iniquity abounds, instead of
grace, in many that name the name, of Christ. They want love, and
therefore cannot depart from iniquity.[4]

4. [They want HOPE.] Hope is another of those great and principal
graces, which the Holy Ghost worketh in the heart, and without
which, let a man be never so high in profession, and so open in
naming the name of Christ, he cannot depart from iniquity. As was
said before of faith, so we say now of hope. 'And every man that
hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.' (1
John 3:3) Here is that excellent office, or rather effect of hope
made manifest, it purifieth, it cleanseth a man; it makes him make
the Lord Jesus his example, as well as his Saviour. He purifieth
himself even as he is pure; to wit, in soul, in body, in spirit,
in life and conversation. Hope of life, eternal by Christ, makes
a man purify himself in obeying the truth through the Spirit.
Hope to be with Christ hereafter, will make me strive to believe
him here. Hope of being with angels then, will make a man strive
to live like an angel here. Alas! alas! there is a company of
half-priests in the world, and they cannot, they dare not teach
the people the whole counsel of God, because in so doing they
will condemn themselves and their manner of living in the world;
where is that minister now to be found that dare say to his people,
Look on me, and walk as you have me for an example? or that dare
say, What you see and hear to be in me, do, 'and the God of peace
shall be with you ?' (Phil 3:17; 4:9) These men had hope and hope
purified them to an example, till they became patterns to others.
Is not this now far off from some professors in the world? Are
they purified, are they clean that name the name of Christ? are
they weaned from that milk, and drawn from the breasts? No, nor
their profession is not attended with grace; they name the name
of Christ; well, but they do not depart from iniquity. Let a man
believe a lie, and according to the reality of his belief, such
will his obedience be; let a man hope for that for which he hath
no ground to hope, yet his hope will work with him according to
the power thereof; and yet we have a generation of men that profess
the blessed gospel, which yieldeth the most substantial ground for
faith and hope; yea, we have a company of men that will be naming
the name of Christ, which is the sweetest, the most taking, and
desirable name that is named among the sons of men, and for all
that, this gospel, this worthy name, nor yet their naming of it,
doth make them depart from iniquity. But what's the reason? why,
they have taken up a profession, but want the grace of Christ; the
faith, the repentance, the love and hope of the gospel. No marvel
then, if they abide among the wooden sort of professors: no marvel
then, though the iniquity of their heels still follows them, and
that it droppeth from them wherever they go. But so much for the
first reason, why men do name the name of Christ and yet do not
depart from iniquity.

Second, The second reason, why some that name the name of Christ,
depart not from iniquity, is, for that, though they rest not in
bare notions, as those forementioned, yet they take up as they,
short of the saving grace of God. There are bare notions, there
are common workings, and there is a work that is saving, and that
will do the soul good to eternity.

1. There are bare notions, and they that have them are such unto
whom the gospel comes IN WORD ONLY. (1 Thess 1:5; 1 Cor 4:19,20)
Such whose religion stands in word only, and is not attended with
a power suitable; that is, there goeth not along with the word, a
power sufficient to subdue, and work over the heart to a cordial
and gracious close with that word that comes to them. Yet such is
the noise and sound of the word, that they are willing to become
professors thereof; there is some kind of musicalness in it,
especially when well handled and fingered by a skilful preacher.
And lo, saith God unto such preachers, when their auditory is made
up of such kind of hearers, 'And lo, thou art unto them as a very
lovely song,' or as one that sings a song of loves, 'of one that
hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for
they hear thy words but they do them not.' (Eze. 33:30-32)

2. But then, besides these, there is another sort, and they go
further than these. For to them the word came, not in word only,
but also in POWER: though not in that or in such a power as is
sufficient absolutely against all attempts whatsoever to bring the
soul to glory. Of these we read in several places; to wit, that
they have tasted of the powers of the world to come; but not so
as to bring them safe to glory. Yet thus far they go. (1.) They
attain light or illumination, to see much of their state by nature
with. (Heb 6:4) (2.) This light standeth not in bare speculation,
but lets fall upon the conscience convincing arguments to the
bowing and humbling of the spirit. (1 Kings 21:27-29) (3.) They
submit to these convictions, and reform, and may for a time not only
come out from them that live in error, but escape the pollutions
of the world, by the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
(2 Peter 2:18-20; Gal 3:4; 4:20) (4.) Yea, so powerful will this
dispensation be, that it will prevail with them to do and suffer
many things for the vindication of the truth of that gospel which
they profess. For the word will be sweet unto them. Christ, the
gift of God, will be relished by them. (Heb 6:4,5) The powers of
the world to come will be in them. Some workings of the Holy Ghost
will be in them. And joy, which is as oil to the wheels, will be
with their souls. (Luke 8:13)

Thus, I say, it is with some professors, who yet cannot be said
to depart from iniquity, that is, for all ado, because the things
that now are upon them, abide with them but awhile. 'For awhile
they believe: they rejoice in the light for a season.' (Luke
8:13, John 5:35, 2 Peter 2:21) So they clean escape from them,
who live in error for a little, or awhile; and after that return
to their old course, and are again entangled with their iniquities
and overcome. This is called, 'A turning with the dog to his own
vomit again, and with the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire.' And some of these are set forth by this and such like
sayings, 'When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh
through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none. Then he saith,
I will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he
is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. Then goeth
he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than
himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of
that man is worse than the first.' (Matt 12:44,45)

Now the causes of this declension, returning, or falling away
again into iniquity, are many.

First [Cause of falling away.] One is for that this work, this
work of power that they have been made partakers of, has not
been thorough enough upon all the powers of their souls. Their
understandings, their judgments and consciences have been dealt
with, but the power of God has not been upon their wills and
minds, and affections, rightly to subdue them to the grace of the
gospel. (Psa. 110:3) Indeed there seems to be subjection of the
will, and an overruling of the mind, and affections also, else
they could not for a time lay aside their iniquity, come off from
the pollutions of the world, and for a season rejoice in the world
and be pleased with the light thereof. But we may consider, that
this may be, not for that a sound work of God hath passed upon these
powers of the soul, but that rather this was by reason of those
reflex acts, that the understanding now enlightened, the judgment
now informed, and the conscience now convinced, had upon these
other powers of the soul. And I the rather think it so, because
willingness, mindfulness of, and affection for, this gospel, lasted
no longer than the light shined in their understandings, or than
the things were relished by their judgment and conscience. So that
when the light of their candle went out, and when the taste of
this sugar-plum was out of their mouth, their wills and affections,
not being possessed with the fear of God, they returned again to
their course, and went away as before with iniquity.

Nor do I by anything here discoursed, lay blame or fault at the
door of God. For,

1. He is a free agent to do what he pleaseth, and may, if he please,
refuse to give anything, or if he gives something, why may he not
give what he pleases also? He may give special grace to one, and
that which is not so to another: he may open Balaam's eyes, (Num.
24:3) and open Lydia'a heart; (Acts 16:14) he may give some but
a taste, and cause some to eat abundantly. (Heb. 6; Songs 5:1)
He may suffer some to fall away, and keep others, by his power,
through faith unto salvation.

2. Besides, God's withdrawing, to wit, of those common workings,
if they were withdrawn without, a cause given--which yet I
question--yet why may they not be withdrawn from these, as well
as from his own peculiar ones. He knows but little, that doth
not know that God ofttimes hides his face from his own, and also
withdraws from them the light and great influences of the Holy
Ghost: and turns them over, at least in their own apprehensions,
to the ungodly, and to fallen angels for their chastisement, or
trial; or instruction, &c.

3. And why may not God, since these rebels had such working with
them, as that their minds, by their understanding, their will and
affections; by their judgment and consciences were somewhat taken
and allured, cause a withdrawing of these for trial, and to see
if they would cry after him to return.

But we will let these things pass, and call you again to remembrance
of what is in hand: we are now shewing that there be them that
name the name of Christ, 'that yet depart not from iniquity,' and
in shewing the cause of their not so doing, one was for that the
gospel came to them in word only; and the other was, for that
though it came to others in power, yet not in power, or in that
power, that effectually keepeth some to salvation. Upon this
second reason I now am, and am shewing how it comes to pass that
they that are under the power of the things that we have afore
discoursed, should notwithstanding that, return to their vomit
again. One cause of this declension, or going back to iniquity,
I have just now touched upon, and we have some more behind.

Second [Cause of falling away.] Therefore such persons upon the
withdrawing of those influences that at present are mighty upon
them, do forthwith; forget, both what they had, and what work it
made upon them. Straightway they forget what manner of men they
were. It is said of Israel, they sang his praises, they soon forgot
his word. So these they forget.

1. They forget what light and what conviction they had.

2. They forget what sorrow for sin they had.

3. They forget what tastes of Christ and his word they had.

4. They forget what joy and comfort they had.

5. They forget how fair for heaven they were.

6. And they forget how cleansed once they were.

'They have forgotten that they were purged from their old sins.'
(2 Peter 1:9) Now forgetfulness makes things that are past as
nothing; and if so, then it can lay no obligations upon the mind,
to engage it to the delight of them, and to the enjoying of them,
no not in the thoughts of them, as if they were remembered by us.
Forgetfulness is a very dangerous thing: it makes preaching vain,
profession vain, faith vain, and all to no purpose. (1 Cor. 15:1,
2) Such profession is but a dream, and the professors but as
dreamers: all vanishes in the morning. This made Paul so caution
the Corinthians, that they forgot not the preaching; and the author
to the Hebrews, so earnestly calls them, in their back-sliding,
back to the remembrance of former days, and to the recollecting
of what it was that then had made them so willingly endure their
great fight of affliction. (Heb. 10:32, 33)

Forgetfulness, I say, makes things nothing; it makes us as if
things had never been; and so takes away from the soul one great
means of stay, support, and encouragement; when choice David was
dejected, the remembrance of the hill Hermon was his stay; when
he was to go out against Goliah, the remembrance of the lion and
the bear was his support: so when those that have had the power
of the things of God upon them, can think of this; when they are
withdrawn, it will, even the thinking of it, have some kind of
operation upon the soul. And therefore you shall find, that the
recovering of a backslider usually begins at the remembrance of
former things. 'Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do the first works.' (Rev. 2:5)

It is marvellous to see how some men are captivated with this
forgetfulness. Those that sometimes have prayed, cried, groaned,
and sighed, for eternal life; those that sometimes thought no
pains too much, no way too far, no hazards too great to run, for
eternal life; those who sometimes were captivated with the word,
and with the comforts and joy thereof, and that, had it been
possible, could have pulled out their eyes, and have given them to
a gospel minister, so dear and sweet were the good tidings which
they brought to such. (Gen. 4:14, 15) I say it is marvellous to
see how such men are captivated with the forgetfulness of this.
They are as if they never had been those men; they are as if they
had never had such things; or, as if they never had thought about
them. Yea, they are strange, and carry it strangely to all those
that still are under the power of that word, and of that mighty
band by which sometimes themselves were guided.

Should one say to some, Art not thou the man that I once saw crying
under a sermon, that I once, heard cry out, What must I do to
be saved? and, that some time ago I heard speak well of the holy
word of God? how askew will they look upon one; or if they will
acknowledge that such things were with them once, they do it more
like images and rejected ghosts, than men. They look as if they
were blasted, withered, cast out, and dried to powder, and now
fit for nothing but to be cast into the fire, and burned. (John
15:6) The godliness from which they are departed, and the iniquity
unto which again they have joined themselves, has so altered, so
metamorphosed and changed their heart, and mind, and ways. This
therefore as the second thing which shews why some that have been
under something of the power of things,[5] are again with iniquity
entangled and overcome.

Third [Cause of falling away.] Another thing that makes these
enlightened ones, that they continue not to depart from iniquity,
is the persecution that always attends the word: for persecution
always attends the word, that of the tongue, or that of the sword.
Now these men that were once enlightened, though they cannot
remember what they were themselves, yet Satan helps them to think
that their neighbours remember what they were: and having now
lost the savour, the sense of what they once had, and sinned away
that Spirit that brought it to them, they grow weak; yea are above
all men the most unable to stand up, to abide the shock and trial,
that for their profession is coming upon them. Wherefore, by and
by they are offended; to wit, with their own profession, and call
themselves an hundred fools, for being so heedless, so witless, and
unwary, to mind God's holy things in such a time and day. (Matt.
4:16, 17; Luke 8:13) Then they bethink with themselves, how to
make an honourable retreat, which they suppose they usually do,
by finding fault, first with their own unadvisedness, and of the
over-persuasiveness of others; they also now begin to say farewell
conscience, yea, God and heaven and all, and join in confederacy
with the world again. Thus are they in fear, where no fear is;
and the sound of a shaken leaf doth chase them. And there are four
things that are the cause of this.

1. For that not withstanding the former power that attended the
word to their hearts, their hearts did still abide as hard as
a rock, there was no true and sound breaking, nor softening in
that; wherefore there the word wanted depth of earth, as our Lord
is pleased to call it; and anon when the sun was up, that which
remained was presently scorched, and so withered away.

2. Notwithstanding what they had sometimes enjoyed, yet the grace
of the fear of God was wanting in them. (Eccl. 7:16-18) So wanting
that, what should hinder but that they should return to go as
they came, and leave Christ, the gospel, and the people of God to
shift as well as they can for themselves.

3. All that they enjoyed did not estrange their hearts from their
lusts, though when they were in the power of things, they were
deader to them than formerly; I say than formerly. (Psa. 78:30,
36, 37) And it is even with such, as with them, who are for a time
taken off from what yet they love, by some new employ in which
they are engaged. Saul went out to look for David to kill him,
but when he came at Naioth, in Ramah, the Spirit of God came upon
him, and he prophesied. (1 Sam. 19:18, 24) But this lasted but
for a while. Saul soon returned to his old envy against the holy
man again.

4. It comes upon them even of judgment and wrath, for since they
so soon give way to sin, and forget, God suffereth them to fall
into the fear of men, and to force their hearts to comply with bad
things,--even as Judas and Demas did,--till they are swallowed up
of that gulph, into which the ungodly descend. 'As for such as
turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth
with the workers of iniquity.' (Psa. 125:5)

When once God is angry with a people, he can deal with them, he
can give them up to those lusts in judgment, that they will not
be separated from by mercy. Yea, he can make a way for his anger
to overtake them that have made a way, by the deceits of their
hearts, to go a-whoring from under him.

And these are the causes why those that were once enlightened, and
have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, return with the dog to his own vomit again; and so, though
they have or do name the name of Christ, yet depart not from
iniquity.

Third, A third reason, why they that name the name of Christ do not
depart from iniquity, may be, because GRACE IS WEAK and CORRUPTION
STRONG. I speak now of them that are truly gracious; for as those
that never had nothing but notion, did never at all depart from
iniquity: and as those that never had saving grace, though common
workings were with them, do but a little depart from iniquity; so
those that yet have the grace of God in them, in truth, do not,
as they should, depart from iniquity; wherefore the exhortation is
as much to them as it is to any body else; 'and let them that name
the name of Christ,' with gracious lips, 'depart from iniquity.'
For though there is a great difference betwixt these and the two
sorts that I mentioned before,--these having the true principles of
holiness in them, but the other nothing thereof,--yet they, even
they, also have need of this exhortation; for they do not, as
they should, 'depart from iniquity.' Their graces, as I said, are
weak, and that is the reason thereof.

That these do not depart from iniquity, as they should, is clear.

1. For that their highest acts of holiness are tainted therewith,
and made imperfect thereby. (Isa. 64:6; Psa. 143:2; Heb. 12:15;
Matt. 6:23) This is manifest, because they still are afraid to
shew themselves before God in their own works, and because they
betake them for acceptation with God, to the priestly office of
Christ, and pray by him, 'forgive us our trespasses.'

2. This is clear also, because we are, while in this world, nowhere
by the word said to have attained to the mark and point of absolute
perfection; but are bid to grow, to follow on, to press forward,
and to perfect holiness in the fear of God. (2 Peter 3:18; Heb.
6:12; Phil. 3:12-14; 2 Cor. 7:1) Yea, the best of us all, even
the apostles and prophets, have not only made it manifest by their
imperfections, that as yet they have not departed from iniquity as
they should; but they have confessed, and denied not, that they
were yet in the pursuit of righteousness, and had not already
attained.

3. This is clear also, for that the righteousness, by the which the
best of saints are justified in the sight of God, is a righteousness
of another, not their own; the righteousness of another man, for
that there is not any upon earth that doth good and sins not.
And what need we pray, 'forgive us our trespasses,' approach God
in the perfections of another, and be bid 'to perfect holiness,'
if we had already attained, or were already perfect, or were so
departed from iniquity as we should.

4. Alas, the complaints of God concerning this matter, doth
sufficiently testify the truth of what I say. When God came to his
people in Egypt, and bid them forsake the idols of Egypt, they did
not. But they rebelled against me, says he, and would not hearken
unto me; they did not, every man, cast away the abominations of
his eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Well, he
saved them out of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness,
and said to them there, Obey my laws, and my commandments; but
the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness, they
walked not in my statutes, they despised my judgments. Well, then
he had them from the wilderness to Canaan, and then said to them,
Keep my laws. (Eze. 20) But when he had brought them into the
land, then they also polluted themselves, and sinned, against him
as before. Again, when God brought them out of captivity, both
they, and every thing that they did, was unclean. (Hag. 2:14)

To be short, what says Paul in the seventh to the Romans? what
says James in the third chapter of his epistle? (ch. 3:2) And what
says John in his first epistle, and first chapter? (1 John 1:9)
Do they not all confess, though themselves were apostles, and so
for grace and gifts beyond any that breathe in this world, that
sin and iniquity was yet with them; and so consequently, that
there was not as yet that departing by them therefrom, as there
should. And the reason, as I have said, is, because grace is weak,
weak in the beat and most strong of the saints of God. Hence the
greatest saints use to complain, when much assaulted with corruptions,
or attended with very hard service for God, of their weakness and
insufficiency, as to a completeness of doing the will of God.

(1.) Moses, when God did but bid him nourish and succour Israel in
the wilderness, and carry them in his bosom, as the nursing-father
beareth the sucking child, was stricken with such fear of
miscarrying, through the weakness of his graces and the power of
his corruptions, that he cried to God, saying, 'I am not able to
bear all this people alone, because it too heavy for me. And if
thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand,--and
let me not see my wretchedness.' (Num. 11:14, 15)

(2.) Job, when he was, for a proof of his integrity, to be exercised
a while with some of the judgments of God, cries out, in a sense
of his weakness to bear them, and to go through as he should, 'Is
my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass?' And
again, 'Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over
me? Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? And wilt thou pursue
the dry stubble?' (Job 6:12; 8:12; 13:25)

(3.) So Daniel, when he was but to stand and talk with the angel,
how weak did he find himself; 'There remained,' saith he, 'no
strength in me;' and, '0 my Lord, by the vision my sorrows are
turned upon me, and I have retained no strength. For how can the
servant of this my Lord talk with this my Lord? for as for me,
straightway there remained no strength in me, neither is there
breath left in me.' (Dan. 10) Some may say, but this is natural
weakness. But I ask, how came nature to be so weak, but through
sin? the remains whereof abiding still upon the best of saints,
make them, not withstanding their graces, incapable to do any
thing as they should.

(4.) Paul, a man of men, who had so much grace, revelation of
grace and communion with Christ, that sometimes he knew not whether
he was in or out of the body, and yet you find him making bitter
complaint of the weakness of his grace, and of the power of his
corruptions. 'I am carnal,' saith he, and what I hate that do
I. 'How to perform that which is good I find not;' 'when I would
do good evil is present with me.' 'But I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members.' '0 wretched
man that I am,' &c. What complaints, what confessions, what bewailing
of weakness is here? And what need was there of any of this, if
Paul could, as he would, have departed from iniquity? (Rom. 8)

I have instanced in these four men, because as to failings and
miscarriages they are as free--by what the holy record saith--as
any four of whose lives you shall read in all the Bible; but you
see that they were too weak to do good and depart from iniquity
as they would.

Grace may be said to be weak, either when a lower or less degree
thereof is compared with a higher and greater degree of the same;
or it may be said to be weak when, in what degree of it you will,
it shall be engaged by, or engage itself against sin, &c.

There are degrees of grace in the world, some have less, and some
bigger measures thereof, and according to the measure of grace
received, so is a Christian capable of action. He that has little,
acts but weakly; he that has much, acts more strongly; and he
of the saints that has most, acteth best of all: but yet none of
these three can act so as they should and would, and, consequently,
so depart from iniquity as is their duty. Witness those four that
I mentioned but now, for they are among the first-rate of saints,
yet you see what they did, and hear what they said.

Sin is a mighty tyrant; it is also installed in our flesh, and
has moreover that in it which suiteth with whatever is sensual in
us. The flesh relisheth it well, though the spirit of the Christian
is against it.

Sin is an active beast, and will not admit that the soul should
attempt to put forth itself in any good thing, without opposition
and contradiction. 'When I should do good evil is present with
me.'[6]

Sin is of a polluting and defiling nature, and what grace soever
it toucheth it staineth, and in staining makes it weaker, than
were it not so defiled it would be. Besides, not a grace, nor an
act of grace in the soul can escape untouched.

Unbelief stands ready to annoy faith in the grace, as well as in
the act of faith.

Hardness of heart will not let love so affectionately and
sympathisingly act as it should.

Sense and reason being polluted will not let hope be so steadfastly
fixed upon unseen things as it should.

Pride will not let us be so humble as we ought, nor self so self
denying. Passion often interrupts our patience, and angry motions
our meekness. By these, and more that might be named, it appears
that sin is in us, opposeth our graces, and letteth[7] them from
acting as they should; and because this sin has part of ourself
in its possession, therefore though our more noble part be utterly
against it, yet we depart not from it as we should.

God chargeth Moses with rash and unadvised words, and so he doth
Job also: Daniel did wear the name of an idol god, and Paul freely
confesseth himself unfirm. (Num. 20:12; Psa. 106:32; Job 38:2;
Job 42:6; Dan. 4:8; Rom. 7:24)

Nor may what hath now been said be applied to those that are weak
in faith, and so in every other grace; for the strongest grace
when acted as well as we can, cannot cause that we depart from
iniquity as we should. (l.) Because the strongest grace cannot
act without opposition. (2.) Because we that are the actors are
lame, infirm, and made weak by sin that dwells in us. (3.) Because
grace and a state of grace is not that wherein the perfection
designed for us doth lie, for that is in another world. (a.) This
is a place to act faith in. (b.) This is a place to labour and
travel in. (c.) This is a place to fight and wrestle in. (d.) This
is a place to be tried in.

And therefore this is no place of perfection, and consequently no
place where God's people can depart from iniquity as they should.
Now there is a twofold way of departing from iniquity. I. One is
when the mind is set against it, and withdrawn from the love and
liking of it. II. The other is when the practice of it is shunned
by the whole man.

I. The first of these ways, the saints, though they truly do depart
from iniquity, yet depart not from it as they should. (1.) Their
understanding sees not the utmost baseness that is in it. (2.) Their
judgment is not informed about the vileness of it to perfection.
(3.) The conscience has not yet been convinced of all the evil that
is in it. Then, (a.) How should the soul abhor it as it should?
(b.) How should the desires depart from it with that fervency as
they should? (c.) And the will and affections so turn away from
it as they should?

II. Second, As to the shunning of the acts of sin, there we also
come wonderful short.

We shun not the sins of others as we should. This is made appear,
(1.) For that we shun not the company of base men as we should.
(2.) Nor shun or refuse to imitate them in their evil, as we should.
How easily are good men persuaded to comply with bad men's ways.
Yea, Jehoshaphat himself said to Ahab, that base one: Behold, 'I
am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.'
(1 Kings 22:4) Joseph could learn in Pharaoh's court, to 'swear
by Pharaoh's life.' (Gen. 42:15, 16) Peter also, when dissembling,
was in fashion among the people, could learn to dissemble likewise.
(Gal. 2:11-14)

We shun not our own sins or the sine of our own company as we
should. Christians learn to be proud one of another, to be covetous
one of another, to be treacherous and false one of another,
to be cowardly in God's matters one of another, to be remiss and
negligent in christian duties one of another.

Besides, if I should go about to shew here, how Christians will
hide iniquity, as David. (2 Sam. 12:12) How they will excuse it,
as did Aaron. (Ex. 32:22-24) How they will plead for it, as did
the men of the city of Joash for Baal. (Jud. 6:29-31) and the like,
I might soon make it abundantly appear, that Christians do not
depart from iniquity as they should; and therefore the exhortation
stands; good, and of use to the best of saints on earth, that
they and every of them 'should depart from iniquity.' Yea, the
observation also that they do not do it as they should, doth still
stand good against us.

Wherefore, as it is true in those that have nothing but notion,
and that it is true in those that are wrought upon, but not
effectually, so it is true upon those that are truly gracious;
observation proves it, fears of damnation prove it, the outcry
of the world proves it, and the confession of the best men proves
it.


[OBSERVATION SECOND.]

I come now to another observation with which I will present you,
and that is this, namely, that every one that in way of profession and
religion names the name of Christ, 'SHOULD DEPART from iniquity.'
I say, that every one that in a way of profession and religion,
'nameth the name of Christ, should depart from iniquity.' This
truth needs more practice than proof. For I think there are none
that have either scripture or reason by them, but will freely
consent to this.

Nor is there any thing ambiguous in the observation, that we need
now to stand upon the explaining of. For,

What iniquity is, who knows not?

That it cleaves to the best, who knows not?

That it is disgraceful to profession, who knows not? and therefore
that it ought to be departed from, who knows not?

But because the motives in particular may not be so much considered
as they ought, and because it is Satan's design to tempt us to
be unholy, and to keep iniquity and the professing man together;
therefore I will in this place spend some arguments upon you that
profess, and in a way of profession do name the name of Christ,
that you depart from iniquity; to wit, both in the inward thought
and in the outward practice of it. And those arguments shall
be of four sorts, some respecting Christ, some his Father, some
ourselves, and some the world.


First, [Arguments that respect CHRIST.]

First, The Christ, whom you profess, whose name you name, and
whose disciples you pretend to be, is holy. 'Be ye holy, for I
am holy,' (1 Peter 1:16) This is natural to our discourse; for if
Christ be holy, and if we profess him, and in professing of him,
declare that we are his disciples, we ought therefore to depart
from iniquity, that we may shew the truth of our profession to
the world.

Second, They that thus name the name of Christ should depart from
iniquity, because this Christ, whose name we name, is loving. Those
that have a loving master, a master that is continually extending
his love unto his servants, should be forward in doing of his
will, that thereby they may shew their sense, and acceptation of
the love of their master. Why, this is his will, 'that we depart
from iniquity, that we throw sin away; that we fly every appearance
of evil.' (1 Thess. 5:22; Heb. 7:26)

Third, They that thus name the name of Christ should depart from
iniquity, because of the honour and reputation of their Lord. It
is a disparagement to Christ, that any of his servants, and that
any that name his name, should yet abide by, and continue with,
iniquity. 'A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master:
if then I be a Father, where is mine honour? and if I be a Master,
where is my fear? saith the Lord of hosts, unto you, O priests,
that despise my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy
name?' (Mal. 1:6)

Fourth, They that name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity,
because of his name, that his name may not be evil spoken of by
men; for our holiness puts a lustre and a beauty upon the name
of Christ, and our not departing from iniquity draws a cloud upon
it. Wherefore we ought to depart from iniquity, that the name of
the Lord Jesus may be glorified, and not reproached through us.

Fifth, They that name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity,
because of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. That the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which they profess, may not be evil spoken
of by our neighbours. The gospel is called holy, therefore let them
be holy that profess it. (2 Peter 2:21) The which they can by no
means be, if they depart not from iniquity. Men cannot serve the
designs of the gospel, and their own worldly and fleshly designs.
But they that profess the name of Christ, they should be tender
of his gospel, that they keep that in good esteem and reputation
in the world. The which they can by no means do, unless they depart
from iniquity.

Sixth, They that name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity,
because the very profession of that name is holy. The profession
is an holy profession. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the
Lord; the vessels, that is, the profession, for by that is as it
were carried about the name and gospel of Jesus Christ. We must
therefore lay aside all iniquity, and superfluity of naughtiness,
and do as persons professing godliness, as professing a profession,
that Christ is the priest of, yea the high-priest of 1 Thess.
2:30; Heb. 3:3. It is a reproach to any man to be but a bungler
at his profession, to be but a sloven in his profession. And
it is the honour of a man to be excellent in the managing of his
profession. Christians should be excellent in the management of
their profession, and should make that which is good in itself,
good to the church and to the world, by a sweet and cleanly managing
of it.

Seventh, They that profess the name of Christ, or that name it
religiously, should to their utmost depart from iniquity, because of
the church of Christ which is holy. He that religiously professeth
the name of Christ, has put himself into the church of Christ,
though not into a particular one, yet into the universal one. Now
that is holy. What agreement then hath the temple of God with idols?
Ay, or any pillar, or post, or pin, or member of that temple. (2
Cor. 6:16) One black sheep is quickly espied among five hundred
white ones, and one mangey one will soon affect many. One also
among the saints, that is not clean, is a blemish to the rest,
and, as Solomon says, 'one sinner destroyeth much good.' (Eccl.
9:18)

Eighth, They that profess the name of Christ, or that name that
name religiously, should depart from iniquity, because of the
ordinances of Christ, for they are holy. (Ex. 30:17-31) Men of
old before they went in to meddle with holy things, were to wash
their hands and their feet in a vessel prepared for that purpose.
Now since they that name that name religiously do also meddle with
Christ's appointments, they must also wash and be clean; cleanse
your hands ye sinners, if you mean to meddle with Christ in his
appointment; wash lest God cut you off for your not departing from
iniquity.

Ninth, They that name the name of Christ religiously should depart
from iniquity, because of Christ's observers. There are many that
keep their eye upon Christ, and that watch for an opportunity to
speak against him, even through the sides of those that profess
him. 'Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again
of many in Israel; and for a sign that shall be spoken against.'
(Luke 2:34) Some take occasion to speak against him, because of
the meanness of his person; here some again speak against him,
because of the plainness of his doctrine; also some speak against
him, because of the meanness of his followers; and some speak
against him, because of the evil deeds of some that profess him.
But if he that gives just occasion of offence to the least of the
saints had better be drowned in the sea with a mill-stone about
his neck; what think you shall his judgment be, who, through his
mingling of his profession of Christ's name with a wicked life
shall tempt or provoke men to speak against Christ?


SECOND, I come now to those arguments that respect GOD THE FATHER.

First, Then, they that profess the name of Christ should depart
from iniquity; because of God the Father, because God the Father
has made Christ to be to us what he is; to wit, the Apostle and
high-priest of our profession. 'He that honoureth not the Son,
honoureth not the Father which hath sent him.' (1 Cor. 1:30;
John 5:23; 15:8) Nor can the Father be honoured by us, but by our
departing from iniquity. All our talk and profession of Christ,
adds no glory to his Father, who has made him our King, and
Priest, and Prophet, if it be not joined to an holy conversation.
Wherefore, if you profess the name of Christ, and would hold the
word in hand, that you have believed in him, depart from iniquity,
for the Father's sake that hath sent him.

Second, As it is the Father which hath made Christ to us what he
is; so it is the Father who hath called us to partake of Christ
and all his benefits. 'Wherefore we must depart from iniquity
that profess the name of Christ, that we may glorify him for his
call.' (1 Cor. 1:9; Heb. 3:1) He has called us to the fellowship
of his Son Jesus Christ; that is, to partake of all that good
that is in him, as Mediator, and to be done by him for those that
trust in him. Nor had we ever come out of a cursed and condemned
condition, to Christ, for life and blessedness, but by the call
of the Father; 'For it is not of works, but of him that calleth.'
(Rom. 9:11) Now since he has called us to this privilege--even
us whom he has called--and left others in their sins to perish by
his judgments, it is meet we should depart from iniquity. (Heb.
3:1; 2 Peter 1:2, 3) Especially since the call by which he called
us is heavenly, and holy, and because he has not only called us
to glory, but to virtue.

Third, We that religiously name the name of Christ, should depart
from iniquity, because God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
has commanded us to do. Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds,
be sober, and hope to the ene for the grace that is to be brought
unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. As obedient children,
not fashioning yourselves according to your former lusts in your
ignorance; but as he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy
in all manner of conversation: because it is written, 'Be ye holy,
as I am holy.'

Fourth, They that religiously name the name of Christ should depart
from iniquity, that they may answer the end for which they are
called to profess his name. The Father has, therefore, called them
to profess his name, that they might be trees of righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. Dost thou then
profess the name of Christ: bring forth those fruits that become
that holy profession, that you may be called 'trees of righteousness,'
and that God may be glorified for and by your professed subjection
to the gospel of his Son. (Isa. 61:3)

Fifth, They that name--as afore--the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
should depart from iniquity, that they may shew to the world
the nature and power of those graces, which God the Father has
bestowed upon them that do religiously name the name of Christ.
And the rather, because he that religiously nameth that name,
declareth even by his so naming of him, that he has received grace
of the Father, to enable him so to do. Now he cannot declare this
by deeds, unless he depart from iniquity; and his declaring of it
by words alone, signifies little to God or man. (Titus 1:16)

Sixth, We therefore that religiously name the name of Christ, should
also depart from iniquity, because the Spirit of the Father will
else be grieved. (Eph. 4:30) The countenancing of iniquity, the not
departing therefrom, will grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by which
you 'are sealed to the day of redemption;' and that is a sin of
a higher nature that men commonly are aware of. He that grieveth
the Spirit of God shall smart for it here, or in hell, or both.
And that Spirit that sometimes did illuminate, teach, and instruct
them, can keep silence, can cause darkness, can withdraw itself,
and suffer the soul to sin more and more; and this last is the
very judgment of judgments. He that grieves the Spirit, quenches
it; and he that quenches it, vexes it; add he that vexes it,
sets it against himself, and tempts it to hasten destruction upon
himself. (1 Thess. 5:19) Wherefore take heed, professors, I say
take heed, you that religiously name the name of Christ, that you
meddle not with iniquity, that you tempt not the Spirit of the Lord
to do such things against you, whose beginnings are dreadful, and
whose end in working of judgments is unsearchable. (Isa. 63:10;
Acts 5:9) A man knows not whither he is going, nor where he shall
stop, that is but entering into temptation; nor whether he shall
ever turn back, or go out at the gap that is right before him. He
that has begun to grieve the Holy Ghost, may be suffered to go on
until he has sinned that sin which is called the sin against the
Holy Ghost. And if God shall once give thee up to that, then thou
art in the iron cage, out of which there is neither deliverance
nor redemption. Let every one, therefore, that nameth the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity, upon this second consideration.


THIRD, In the next place, I come now to those arguments that do
respect THYSELF.

First, Those that religiously name the name of Christ should,
must, depart from iniquity, because else our profession of him is
but a lie. 'If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk
in darkness, we lie.' (I John 1:6) 'And walk in darkness;' that
is, and walk in iniquity, and depart not from a life that is
according to the course of this world. 'He that saith, I know him,
and heepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him.' (ch. 2:4) The truth that he professes to know, and that
he saith he hath experience of, is not in him. Every man that
nameth the name of Christ is not therefore a man of God, nor is
the word in every man's mouth, truth, though he makes profession
of that worthy name. (1 Kings 17:24) It is then truth in him,
and to others with reference to him, when his mouth and his life
shall agree. (Rev. 2:2, 9; 3:9) Men may say they are apostles,
and be liars: they may say they are Jews, that is, Christians, and
lie, and be liars, and lie in so saying. Now this is the highest
kind of lying, and certainly must therefore work the saddest sort
of effects. Thus man's best things are lies. His very saying, I
know him, I have fellowship with him, I am a Jew, a Christian, is
a lie. His life giveth his mouth the lie: and all knowing men are
sure he lies. 1. He lies unto God: he speaks lies in the presence,
and to the very face of God. Now this is a daring thing: I know
their lies, saith he; and shall he not recompense for this? See
Acts 5:4; Rev. 21:8, 27; 22:15. and take heed. I speak to you that
religiously name the name of Christ, and yet do not depart from
iniquity. 2. He lies unto men; every knowing man; every man that
is able to judge of the tree by the fruit, knows that that man
is a liar, and that his whole profession as to himself is a lie,
if he doth not depart from iniquity. Thus Paul called the slow
bellies,[8] the unsound professors among the Cretians, liars.
They were so in his eyes, for that their profession of the name
of Christ was not seconded with such a life as became a people
professing godliness. (Titus 1:12-16) They did not depart from
iniquity. But again, 3. Such a man is a liar to his own soul.
Whatever such an one promiseth to himself, his soul will find it
a lie. There be many in the world that profess the name of Christ,
and consequently promise their soul the enjoyment of that good,
that indeed is wrapt up in him, but they will certainly be mistaken
hereabout, and with the greatest terror will find it so, when they
shall hear that direful sentence, 'Depart from me, all ye workers
of iniquity.' (Luke 8:27) Christ is resolved that the loose-lived
professor shall not stand in the judgment, nor any such sinners
in the congregation of the righteous. They have lied to God, to
men, and to themselves; but Jesus then will not lie unto them: he
will plainly tell them that he hath not known them, and that they
shall not abide in his presence. But,

Second, Those that religiously name the name of Christ should
depart from iniquity, else, as they are liars in their profession,
so they are self deceivers. I told you but now such lie to themselves,
and so consequently they deceive themselves. 'But be ye doers of
the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your ownselves.' (John
1:22) It is a sad thing for a man, in and about eternal things,
to prove a deceiver of others; but for a man to deceive himself,
his ownself of eternal life, this is saddest of all; yet there
is in man a propenseness so to do. Hence the apostle says, be not
deceived, and let no man deceive himself. And again, verse 26,
'If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.'
These words, 'but deceiveth his own heart,' I have much mused about:
for they seem to me to be spoken to show how bold and prodigiously
desperate some men are, who yet religiously name the name of Christ:
desperate, I say, at self deceiving. He deceiveth his own heart;
he otherwise persuadeth it, than of its ownself it would go:
ordinarily men are said to be deceived by their hearts, but here
is a man that is said to deceive his own heart, flattering it off
from the scent and dread of those convictions, that by the Word,
sometimes it hath been under: persuading of it that there needs
no such strictness of life be added to a profession of faith in
Christ, as by the gospel is called for: or that since Christ has
died for us, and rose again, and since salvation is alone in him,
we need not be so concerned, or be so strict to matter how we
live. This man is a self deceiver; he deceives his own heart. Self
deceiving, and that about spiritual and eternal things, especially
when men do it willingly, is one of the most unnatural, unreasonable,
and unaccountable actions in the world. 1. It is one of the most
unnatural actions; for here a man seeks his own ruin, and privily
lurks for his own life. (Prov. 1:18) We all cry out against him
that murders his children, his wife, or his own body, and condemn
him to be one of those that has forgot the rules and love of
nature. But behold the man under consideration is engaged in such
designs as will terminate in his own destruction: he deceiveth
his own soul. 2. This is also the most unreasonable act; there
can no cause, nor crumb of cause that has the least spark or dram
of reason, or of anything that looks like reason, be shown why a
man should deceive himself, and bereave his soul of eternal life.
Therefore, 3. Such men are usually passed over with astonishment
and silence. 'Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this! and be horribly
afraid, for my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken
me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns,
broken cisterns, that can hold no water.' (Jer. 2:11-13)

But, above all this, as to this head, is the most amazing place,
where it is said, that the self deceiver makes his self deceiving his
sport: 'Sporting themselves with their own deceivings.' (2 Peter
2:13) These are a people far gone, to be sure, that are arrived
to such a height of negligence, carelessness, wantonness, and
desperateness of spirit, as to take pleasure in, and make a sport
of, that which will assuredly deceive them for ever. But this
is the fruit of professing of Christ, and of not departing from
iniquity. The wisdom and judgment of God is such, as to give such
over to the sporting of themselves in their own deceivings.


FOURTH. [Those arguments that respect THE WORLD.]

First, Those that religiously name the name of Christ should depart
from iniquity, because of the scandal that will else assuredly
come upon religion, and the things of religion, through them.
Upon this head I may begin to write with a sigh, for never more
of this kind than now! There is no place, where the professors
of religion are, that is clean and free from offence and scandal.
Iniquity is so entailed to religion, and baseness of life to the
naming of the name of Christ, that one may say of the professors
of this age, as it was said of them of old, 'All tables are full
of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean.' (Isa.
28:8) Where are they even amongst those that strive for the rule,
that mind it at all, when it pinches upon their lusts, their
pride, avarice, and wantonness? Are not, now-a-days, the bulk of
professors like those that 'strain at a gnat and swallow a camel?'
(Matt. 23:24) Yea, do not professors teach the wicked ones to be
wicked? (Jer. 2:33) Ah! Lord God, this is a lamentation, and will
be for a lamentation. What a sore disease is now got into the
church of God, that the generality of professors should walk with
scandal!

No fashion, no vanity, no profuseness, and yet no niggardliness,
but is found among professors. They pinch the poor, and nip from
them their due, to maintain their own pride and vanity. I shall
not need to instance particulars; for from the rich to the poor,
from the pastor to the people, from the master to his man, and
from the mistress to her maiden, all are guilty of scandal, and
of reproaching, by their lives, the name of the Lord; for they
profess, and name that worthy name of Christ, but are not as they
should be, departed from iniquity.

1. Hence the name of God is polluted and reproached, even till
God is weary and cries out, 'Pollute ye my name no more with your
gifts and with your idols.' (Eze. 20:39) O do not pollute my name,
says God; rather leave off profession, and go every one to his
wickedness. Tell the world, if you will not depart from iniquity,
that Christ and you are parted, and that you have left him, to
be embraced by them to whom iniquity is an abomination. It would
far better secure the name of God from scandal and reproach, than
for you to name the name of Christ, and yet not to depart from
iniquity. Then, though you sin, as now you do, the poor world would
not cry out, Ay, this is your religion! Then they would not have
occasion to vilify religion because of you, since you tell them
that Christ and you are parted. But,

2. If you will not leave off to name the name of Christ, nor yet
depart from iniquity, you also scandal the sincere professors
of religion, and that is a grievous thing. There are a people in
the world that have made it their business, ever since they knew
Christ, to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and that desire to perfect holiness in the fear of God;
and you scandalous professors mixing yourselves with them, 'make
their gold look dim.' (Lam. 4:1) You are spots and blemishes to
them; Jude 12, you are an evil mixing itself with their good, and
a scandal to their holy profession. (2 Peter 2:13) You are they
that make the heart of the righteous sad, whom God would not have,
sad; you are they that offend his little ones. Oh! the millstone
that God will shortly hang about your necks, when the time is come
that you must be drowned in the sea and deluge of God's wrath.

3. If you will not leave off to name the name of Christ, nor yet
depart from iniquity, you continue to extend your scandal also
to the word and doctrine of God. They that name the name of Jesus
religiously, should so carry it in the world, that they might
adorn the doctrine of God their Saviour; but thou that professest
and yet departest not from iniquity, thou causest the name and
doctrine which thou professest to be blasphemed and reproached by
the men of this world; and that is a sad thing, a thing that will
bring so heavy a load upon thee, when God shall open thine eyes,
and he will open them either here or in hell-fire, that thou wilt
repent it with great bitterness of soul. (1 Tim. 6:1) The Lord smite
thee to the making of thee sensible to thy shame and conversion,
if it be his blessed will. Amen! But,

4. If thou wilt not leave off to name the name of Christ, nor yet
depart from iniquity, thou wilt bring reproach, scorn, and contempt
upon thyself. For 'sin is a reproach to any people.' (Prov.
14:34). (1.) These are they that God will hold in great contempt
and scorn. (Isa. 1) (2.) These are they that his people shall
have in great contempt. 'Therefore,' saith he, 'have I also made
you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye
have not kept my ways,' but have lifted up the face against my
law.[9] (Mal. 2:9; Jer. 25:9, 18) 3. Such shall also be contemned
and had in derision of the men of this world. They shall be
a hissing, a bye-word, a taunt, and a reproach among all people.
'For them that honour me,' saith God, 'I will honour, and they
that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. (1 Sam. 2:30) I remember
that Philpot used to tell the Papists that they danced with their
buttocks uncovered, in a net,[10] because of the evil of their
ways; (Isa. 20:4) and the Lord bids professors have a care, 'that
the shame of thy nakedness do not appear,' or lest they walk
naked, and their shame be discovered. For those professors that
depart not from iniquity, however they think of themselves, their
nakedness is seen of others: and if it be a shame to the modest
to have their nakedness seen of others, what bold and brazen brows
have they who are not ashamed to show their nakedness, yea, the
very shame of it, to all that dwell about them? And yet thus doth
every one that religiously names the name of Christ, and yet doth
not depart from iniquity.

Second, Those that religiously name the name of Christ, and do
not depart from iniquity, they are the cause of the perishing of
many. 'Woe,' saith Christ, 'unto the world because of offences,'
(Matt. 18:7). And again, 'Woe to that man by whom the offence
cometh!' These are they that cause many to stumble at sin, and
fall into hell. Hark, you that are such, what God says to you: 'Ye
have caused many to stumble at the law,' and at religion. (Mal.
2:8) Men that are for taking of occasion you give it them; men
that would enter into the kingdom, you puzzle and confound them
with your iniquity, while you name the name of Christ, and do not
depart therefrom. One sinner destroyeth much good; these are the
men that encourage the vile to be yet more vile; these be the
men that quench weak desires in others; and these be the men that
tempt the ignorant to harden themselves against their own salvation.
A professor that hath not forsaken his iniquity, is like one that
comes out of the pest-house, among the whole, with his plague
sores running upon him. This is the man that hath the breath of a
dragon, he poisons the air round about him. This is the man that
lays his children, his kinsmen, his friend, and himself. What shall
I say? A man that nameth the name of Christ, and that departeth
not from iniquity, to whom may he be compared? The Pharisees, for
that they professed religion, but walked not answerable thereto,
unto what doth Christ compare them but to serpents and vipers?
What does he call them but hypocrites, whited walls, painted
sepulchres, fools, and blind? and tells them that they made men more
the children of hell than they were before. (Matt. 23) Wherefore
such an one cannot go out of the world by himself: for as he gave
occasion of scandal when he was in the world, so is he the cause
of the damnation of many. 'The fruit of the righteous is a tree
of life.' (Prov. 11:30) But what is the fruit of the wicked, of
the professors that are wicked? why, not to perish alone in their
iniquity. (Job 22:20) These, as the dragon, draw many of the stars
of heaven, and cast them to the earth with their most stinking
tail. (Rev. 12:4) Cast many a professor into earthly and carnal
delights, with their most filthy conversations.

The apostle did use to weep when he spake of these professors,
such offence he knew they were and would be in the world. (Acts
20:30; Phil 3:18, 19) These are the chief of the engines of Satan,
with these he worketh wonders. One Baalam, one Jeroboam, one Ahab;
O how many fish bring such to Satan's net! These are the tares that
he strives to sow among the wheat, for he knows they are mischief
to it. 'Wherefore, let every one that nameth the name of Christ
depart from iniquity.'

Fifth, Those that religiously name the name of Christ, and do not
depart from iniquity, how will they die; and how will they look
that man in the face, unto the profession of whose name they have
entailed an unrighteous conversation? Or do they think that he
doth not know what they have done, or that they may take him off
with a few cries and wringing of hands, when he is on the throne
to do judgment against transgressors? Oh! it had been better they
had not known, had not professed; yea, better they had never been
born; for as Christ said of Judas, so may it be said of these,
it had been good for that man if he had never been born; and as
Christ says it had been good, so Peter says it had been better. (Mark
14:21; 2 Peter 2:20, 21) Good they had not been born, and better
they had not known and made profession of the name of Christ.

But perhaps some may ask me,


WHAT INIQUITY THEY MUST DEPART FROM THAT RELIGIOUSLY NAME THE NAME
OF CHRIST?

First, I answer first, in general, those that religiously profess
the name of Christ, must depart from ALL iniquity. They should
lay aside every weight; they should fly 'all appearance of evil.'
(Heb 12:2; 1 Thess. 5:22) Many there be that are willing to part
with some sins, some pleasures, some unjust profits, if they may
be saved; but this selling of all, parting with all, forsaking of
all, is a very hard chapter.

And yet the Lord Jesus lays it there, saying so likewise,
'whosoever he be of you,' of any of you that professeth my name,
'that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.'
(Luke 14:33) Christ by this text requireth more of them that are
his than to forsake all iniquity. Wherefore, to be sure, every
sin is included. No less than universal obedience will prove a
man sincere. A divided heart is a faulty one. (Hosea 10:2) He that
forsaketh not every sin is partial in the law, nor can he have
respect to all God's commandments. (Job 20:13; John 14:21-24)
There can be no true love to Christ where there are reserves; he
that will hide any one sin in his bosom, or that will keep it,
as the phrase is, under his tongue, is a secret enemy to Jesus
Christ. He loveth not Christ that keepeth not his sayings. To halt
between two is nought, and no man can serve two masters. Christ
is a master, and sin is a master; yea, and masters are they so
opposite, that he that at all shall cleave to the one shall by the
other be counted his enemy. If sin at all be countenanced, Christ
counts himself despised. What man would count himself beloved
of his wife that knows she hath a bosom for another? 'Thou shalt
not be for another man' saith he, 'so will I be for thee.' (Hosea
3:3) Would the king count him a loyal subject who would hide in
his house, nourish in his bed, and feed at his table, one that
implacably hateth and seeketh to murder his majesty? Why, sin is
such an enemy to the Lord Jesus Christ; therefore, as kings command
that traitors be delivered up to justice, so Christ commands
that we depart from iniquity. 'Take away all iniquity,' is a good
prayer, and to 'resist unto blood, striving against sin,' is a
good warfare, and he that brings 'every thought to the obedience
of Christ' gets a brave victory. (Hosea 14:2; Heb. 12:4; 2 Cor.
10:5) Grace leaveneth the whole soul, and so consequently all the
parts thereof. Now where the whole is leavened, the taste must
needs be the same throughout. Grace leaves no power, faculty, or
passion of the soul unsanctified, wherefore there is no corner in
a sanctified soul where sin may hide his head, to find rest and
abode without control. Consequently, he that has a harbour for
this or that sin, and that can find a hiding-place and an abode
for it in his heart, is no Christian man. Let them then that
christianly name the name of Christ, make it manifest that they
do not do it feignedly, by departing from iniquity. But,

Second, And more particularly, they that name the name of Christ,
as above, let them depart from their CONSTITUTION-SIN, or, if you
will, the sin that their temper most inclines them to. Every man
is not alike inclined to the same sin, but some to one and some
to another. Now let the man that professes the name of Christ
religiously, consider with himself, unto what sin or vanity am
I most inclined; Is it pride? Is it covetousness? Is it fleshly
lusts? And let him labour, by all means, to leave off and depart
from that. This is that which David called his own iniquity, and
saith, 'I was also upright before him, and I kept myself from
mine iniquity.' (Psa. 18:23) Rightly are these two put together,
for it is not possible that he should be an upright man that indulgeth
or countenanceth his constitution-sin; but on the contrary, he
that keeps himself from that will be upright as to all the rest;
and the reason is, because if a man has that grace, as to trample
upon and mortify his darling, his bosom, his only sin, he will
more easily and more heartily abhor and fly the rest.

And, indeed, if a man will depart from iniquity, he must depart
from his darling sin first; for as long as that is entertained,
the others, at least those that are most suiting with that darling,
will always be haunting of him. There is a man that, has such and
such haunt his house, and spend his substance, and would be rid
of them, but cannot; but now, let him rid himself of that, for
the sake of which they haunt his house, and then he shall with
case be rid of them. Thus it is with sin. There is a man that is
plagued with many sins, perhaps because he embraceth one: well,
let him turn that one out of doors, and that is the way to be rid
of the rest. Keep thee from thy darling, thy bosom, thy constitution-sin.

Motives to prevail with thee to fall in with this exhortation,
are several.

1. There can no great change appear in thee, make what profession
of Christ thou wilt, unless thou cast away thy bosom sin. A man's
constitution-sin is, as I may call it, his visible sin; it is that
by which his neighbours know him and describe him, whether it be
pride, covetousness, lightness, or the like. Now if these abide
with thee, though thou shouldest be much reformed in thy notions,
and in other parts of thy life, yet say thy neighbours, he is the
same man still; his faith has not saved him from his darling; he
was proud afore, and is proud still; was covetous afore, and is
covetous still; was light and wanton afore, and is so still. He
is the same man, though he has got a new mouth. But now, if thy
constitution-sin be parted with, if thy darling be cast away, thy
conversion is apparent, it is seen of all, for the casting away of
that is death to the rest, and ordinarily makes a change throughout.

2. So long as thy constitution-sin remains, as winked at by thee,
so long thou art an hypocrite before God, let thy profession be
what it will; also, when conscience shall awake and be commanded
to speak to thee plainly what thou art, it will tell thee so, to
thy no little vexation and perplexity.

3. Besides, do what thou canst, so long as thou remainest thus thou
wilt be of a scandalous life. No honour is brought to religion by
such. But,

Again, As they that name the name of Christ 'should depart from
their constitution-sin, so they should depart from the sins
of other men's tempers also. Much harm among professors is done
by each others' sins. There is a man that has clean escaped from
those who live in error, has shaken off the carnal world and the
men thereof, and is come among professors; but, behold, there also
he meeteth with wicked men, with men that have not departed from
iniquity; and there he is entangled. This is a sad thing, and yet
so it is. I doubt there are some in the world, I mean professors,
that will curse the day that ever they were acquainted with some
professors. There are professors that are defilers, professors
that are 'wicked men,' professors of whom a wicked man may learn
to sin. (Jer. 5:26; 2:33) Take heed of these, lest, having fled
from thine own sins, thou shouldest be taken with the sins of
others. 'Be not partakers of other men's sins,' is the counsel
and caution that Paul giveth to Timothy, if he would keep himself
pure. (1 Tim. 5:22)

4. Dost thou profess the name of Christ, and dost thou pretend
to be a man departing from iniquity? Then take heed thou dost not
deceive thyself, by changing one bad way of sinning for another
bad way of sinning. This was a trick that Israel played of old; for
when God's prophets followed them hard with demands of repentance
and reformation, then they would 'gad about to change their ways.'
(Jer. 2:36) But, behold, they would not change a bad way for a
good, but one bad way for another, hopping, as the squirrel, from
bough to bough, but not willing to forsake the tree. Hence they
were said to return, but not to the Most High. Take heed, I say,
of this. Many leave off to be drunkards, and fall in with covetousness.
Many fall off from covetousness to pride and lasciviousness: take
heed of this. (Hosea 7:16) This is a grand deceit, and a common one
too, a deceit of a long standing, and almost a disease epidemical
among professors.

Many times men change their darling sins, as some change their
wives and servants: that which would serve for such an one this
year may not serve to be so for the year ensuing. Hypocrisy would
do awhile ago, but now debauchery. Profaneness would do when
profaneness was in fashion, but now a deceitful profession. Take
heed, professor, that thou dost not throw away thy old darling
sin for a new one. Men's tempers alter. Youth is for pride and
wantonness; middle age for cunning and craft; old age for the world
and covetousness. Take heed, therefore, of deceit in this thing.

5. Dost thou profess the name of Christ, and dost thou pretend
to be a man departing from iniquity? take heed, lest thy departing
from iniquity should be but for a time. Some do depart from
iniquity, as persons in wrangling fits depart from one another;
to wit, for a time, but when the quarrel is over, by means of some
intercessor, they are reconciled again. O! Satan is the intercessor
between the soul and sin, and though the breach between these two
may seem to be irreconcilable; yea, though the soul hath sworn
it will never give countenance to so vile a thing as sin is more;
yet he can tell how to make up this difference, and to fetch them
back to their vomit again, who, one would have thought, had quite
escaped his sins, and been gone. (2 Peter 2:18-22) Take heed,
therefore, O professor. For there is danger of this, and the height
of danger lies in it; and I think that Satan, to do this thing,
makes use of those sins again, to begin this rejoinder, which he
findeth most suitable to the temper and constitution of the sinner.
These are, as I may call them, the master sins; they suit, they
jump with the temper of the soul. These, as the little end of the
wedge, enter with ease, and so make way for those that come after,
with which Satan knows he can rend the soul in pieces. Wherefore,

6. To help this, take heed of parleying with thy sins again, when
once thou hast departed from them: sin has a smooth tongue; if
thou hearken to its enchanting language, ten thousand to one but
thou art entangled. See the saying of the wise man, 'with her
much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of
her lips she forced him. He goeth after her straightway, as an
ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the
stocks.' (Prov. 7:21, 22) He heard her charm, and by hearing is
noosed, and led away to her house, which is the way to hell, 'going
down to the chambers of death.'(ver. 27) Take heed, therefore,
of listening to the charms wherewith sin enchanteth the soul. In
this, be like the deaf adder, stop thine ear, plug it up to sin,
and let it only be open to hear the words of God.

Third, Let them that name the name of Christ depart from the iniquity
of THE TIMES. There are sins that may be called the iniquity of
the day. It was thus in Noah's day, it was thus in Lot's day, and
it was thus in Christ's day--I mean, in the days of his flesh:
and it is a famous thing for professors to keep themselves from
the iniquities of the times. Here lay Noah's excellency, here lay
Lot's excellency, and here will lie thy excellency, if thou keep
thyself from the iniquity of this day. Keep or 'save yourselves
from this untoward generation,' is seasonable counsel, (Acts
2:40) but taken of but few; the sin of the time, or day, being as
a strong current or stream that drives all before it. Hence Noah
and Lot were found, as it were, alone, in the practice of this
excellent piece of righteousness in their generation. Hence it is
said of Noah, that he 'was a just man, and perfect in his generations.'
(Gen. 6:9) And again, the Lord said unto Noah, 'Come thou and all
thy house into the ark, for thee have I seen righteous before me,
in this generation.' The meaning is, he kept himself clear of the
sin of his day, or of the generation among which he lived. (Gen.
7:1)

The same I say of Lot, he kept himself from the sin of Sodom; and
hence Peter cries him up for such a righteous man. 'Just Lot,'
saith he, 'that righteous man,' whose righteous soul was vexed
with the filthy conversation of the wicked. Mark, 'a just man,'
'a righteous man,' 'his righteous soul,' &c. But how obtained
he this character? Why, he abhorred the sin of his time, he fell
not in with the sin of the people, but was afflicted and vexed
thereabout; yea, it was to him a daily burden. 'For that righteous
man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous
soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds. So David, 'I
beheld,' saith he, 'the transgressors, and was grieved, because
they kept not thy word.' (Psa. 119:158) The sin of the times is to
God the worst of sins; and to fall in with the sin of the times is
counted as the highest of transgressions. Consequently, to keep
from them, though a man should, through infirmity, be guilty of
others, yet he is accounted upright. And hence it is, I think, that
David was called a man after God's own heart; to wit, because he
served his own generation by the will of God; or, as the margent
reads, after he had, in his own age, served the will of God.
(Acts 13) By the sin of the times, Satan, as it were, set up his
standard in defiance to God; seeking then to cause his name, in
a signal way, to be dishonoured, and that by the professors of
that age. And hence it is that the Lord doth manifest such wrath
against his people that are guilty of the common sin of their
day, and that he shews such special favour to them that abstain
therefrom. Was there no more, think you, but Noah, in his generation,
that feared God? Yes, several, no doubt; but he was the man that
kept clear of the sin of his day, therefore he and his family
must be partakers of God's deliverance; the other must die before,
and not be permitted to the mercy of the ark, nor to see the new
world with Noah. Unbelief was the sin of the day when Israel was
going from Egypt to Canaan; therefore all that were guilty of that
transgression must be denied to go in to see that good land, yea,
though it were Moses himself. 'And the Lord spake unto Moses and
Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of
the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation
into the land which I have given them.' (Num. 20:12)

The sin of the day is an high transgression; from the which, because
Caleb and Joshua, kept then selves, God kept them from all the
blasting plagues that overtook all the rest, and gave them the land
which he had promised to their fathers. 'But my servant Caleb,
because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me
fully, him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his
seed shall possess it.' (Num. 14:24) Idolatry was the sin of the
day just before Israel were carried captive into Babylon. Now
those of the priests that went astray then, even they say, God
shall bear their iniquity. 'But the priests, the Levites, the sons
of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children
of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near unto me, to
minister unto me; and they shall stand before me, to offer unto me
the fat and the blood, saith the Lord God. They shall enter into
my sanctuary, and they shall come near to my table, to minister
unto me, and they shall keep my charge.' (Ezek. 44:15, 16)

Great complaints have we now among professors, of deadness in
duties, barrenness of the ministry, and of the withdrawing of God
from his people; but I can tell you a cause of all this, namely,
the sin of the day is got into the church of God, and has defiled
that holy place. This is the ground and cause of all these things;
nor is it like to be otherwise, till the cause shall be removed.
If any should ask me what are the sins of our day, I would say
they are conspicuous, they are open, they are declared as Sodom's
were. (Isa. 3:9) They that have embraced them, are not ashamed of
them; yea, they have got the boldness to plead for them, and to
count them their enemies that seek to reform them. All tables are
full of vomit and filthiness. And for pride and covetousness, for
loathing of the gospel, and contemning holiness, as these have
covered the face of the nation, as they have infected most of them
that now name the name of Christ.

And I say again, when you find out a professor that is not horribly
tainted with some of these things, I exclude not the ministers
nor their families, let him be as a beacon upon a hill, or as an
ensign in our land. But says one, Would you have us singular? and
says another, Would you have us make ourselves ridiculous? and
says a third, Such and such, more godly-wise than we, do so. But
I answer, if God has made you singular, and called you to grace,
that is singular; and bid you walk in ways that are singular,
and diverse from the ways of all others. Yea, if to depart from
iniquity will make you ridiculous, if to be holy in all manner
of conversation will make you ridiculous, then be contented to be
counted so. As for the godly-wise you speak of, let them manifest
themselves to be such by departing from iniquity. I am sure that
their being tainted with sins of the day, will not prove them
godly-wise. 'Behold, I have taught you,' said Moses, 'statute and
judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me; that ye should
do so in the land whither you go to possess it. Keep therefore,
and do them, for this is your wisdom, and your understanding in
the sight of the nations, which shall hear of all these statutes,
and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding
people.' Here then is wisdom, and this is that that manifesteth a
people to be, understanding, and godly-wise, even the keeping of
the commandments of God. And why follow the apish fashions of the
world? Hath the God of wisdom set them on foot among us? or is
it because the devil and wicked men, the inventors of these vain
toys, have outwitted the law of God? 'what nation is there so
great, who hath God so nigh unto them' as his people have, and as
he 'is in all things that we call upon him for? And what nation
is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so righteous,
as all this law,' said Moses, which I set before you this day?'
(Deut. 4:5-8) This then is that which declareth us to be godly-wise,
when we keep our soul diligently to the holy words of God; and
fit not only our tongues and lips, but also our lives thereto.

Fourth, But again, let them that name the name of Christ depart
from the iniquity, that is, as I may call it, from FAMILY INIQUITY.
There is a house iniquity; an iniquity that loves not to walk
abroad, but to harbour within doors. This the holy man David was
aware of, therefore he said that he would behave himself 'wisely,
in a perfect way;' yea, saith he, 'I will walk within my house
with a perfect heart.' (Psa. 101:2)

Now this house iniquity standeth in these things. (l.) In domestic
broils and quarrels. (2.) In domestic chamberings and wantonness.
(3.) In domestic misorders of children and servants.

1. For house broils and quarrels, it is an iniquity to be departed
from, whether it be betwixt husband and wife, or otherwise. This,
as I said, is an iniquity that loves not to walk abroad, but yet
it is an horrible plague within doors. And, many that shew like
saints abroad, yet act the part of devils when they are at home,
by giving way to this house iniquity; by cherishing of this house
iniquity. This iniquity meeteth the man and his wife at the very
threshold of the door, and will not suffer them to enter, no not
with one foot into the house in peace, but how far this is from
walking together as heirs of the grace of life, is easy to be
determined. Men should carry it in love to their wives, as Christ
doth to his church; and wives should carry it to their husbands,
as the church ought to carry it to her Saviour. (Eph. 5:21-28;
1 Peter 3:7) And until each relation be managed with respect to
these things, this house iniquity will be cherished there. O! God
sees within doors as well as without, and will judge too for the
iniquity of the house as well as for that more open.

2. As house iniquity standeth in domestic broils and contentions;
so it also standeth in chamberings and wantonness. (Rom. 13:13)
Wherefore the apostle putteth them both together, saying, 'not
in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.' This
chambering and wantonness is of a more general extent, being
entertained by all, insomuch, that sometimes from the head to
the foot all are horribly guilty. But, 'it is a shame to speak of
those things that are done of some in secret;' for 'through the
lusts of their own hearts, they dishonour their own bodies between
themselves,' 'working that which is unseemly,' (Eph. 5:12; Rom.
1:24, 27) to their ignominy and contempt, if not with their fellows
et with God, who sees them, for the darkness hideth not from him.'
(Psa. 139:12) It was for this kind of iniquity with other, that
God told Eli that he would 'judge his house for ever.' (1 Sam.
3:13) also the words that follow are to be trembled at, that say,
'The iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice
nor offering for ever.' (ver. 14) Such an evil thing is house
iniquity in the eyes of the God that is above.

3. As domestic iniquity standeth in these, so also in the
disorders of children and servants. Children's unlawful carriages
to their parents is a great house iniquity; yea, and a common one
too. (2 Tim. 3:2, 3) Disobedience to parents is one of the sins
of the last days. O! it is horrible to behold how irreverently,
how irrespectively, how saucily and malapertly, children, yea,
professing children, at this day, carry it to their parents;
snapping, and checking, curbing and rebuking of them, as if they
had never received their beings by them, or had never been beholden
to them for bringing of them up; yea, as if the relation was lost,
or as if they had received a dispensation from God to dishonour
and disobey parents.

I will add, that this sin reigns in little and great, for not only
the small and young, but men, are disobedient to their parent; and
indeed, this is the sin with a shame, that men shall be disobedient
to parents; the sin of the last times, that men shall be 'disobedient
to parents,' and 'without natural affection.' Where now-a-days
shall we see children that are come to men and women's estate,
carry it as by the word they are bound, to their aged and worn-out
parents? I say, where is the honour they should put upon them?
who speaks to their aged parents with that due regard to that
relation, to their age, to their worn-out condition, as becomes
them? Is it not common now-a-days, for parents to be brought into
bondage and servitude by their children? For parents to be under,
and children above; for parents to be debased, and children
to lord it over them. Nor doth this sin go alone in the families
where it is; no, those men are lovers of their ownselves; covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemous, that are disobedient to their parents.
This is that the prophet means, when he saith, 'The child shall
behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against
the honourable.' (Isa. 3:5) This is a common sin, and a crying
sin, and to their shame be it spoken that are guilty; a sin that
makes men vile to a high degree, and yet it is the sin of professors.
But behold how the apostle brands them; he saith, such have but
'a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof,' and bids
the godly shut them out of their fellowship. (1 Tim. 3:5) This sin
also is, I fear, grown to such a height in some, as to make them
weary of their parents, and of doing their duty to them. Yea,
I wish that some are not 'murderers of fathers and mothers,' by
their thoughts, while they secretly long after, and desire their
death, that the inheritance may be theirs, and that they may be
delivered from obedience to their parents.(1 Tim. 1:9) This is a
sin in the house, in the family, a sin that is kept in hugger-mugger,
close; but God sees it, and hath declared his dislike against it,
by an implicit threatening, to cut them off that are guilty of it.
(Eph. 5:1-5) Let them then that name the name of Christ, depart
from this iniquity.

Disorders of servants is also an house iniquity, and to be departed
from by the godly. 'He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within
my, house;' said David; and 'he that telleth lies shall not tarry
in my sight.' (Psa. 101:7) One of the rarities in Solomon's house,
and which the queen of Sheba was so taken with, was the goodly
order of his servants. (2 Chron. 9:4)

Some of the disorders of servants are to be imputed to the governors
of families, and some to the servants themselves. Those that are
to be imputed to the governors of families, are such as these:
(1.) When the servant learns his vileness of his master, or of
her mistress. (2.) When servants are countenanced by the master
against the mistress; or by the mistress against the master; or
when in opposition to either, they shall be made equals in things.
(3.) When the extravagancies of servants are not discountenanced
and rebuked by their superiors, and the contrary taught them by
word and life.

Those to be imputed to the servants themselves are: (1.) Their
want of reverence to their superiors. (2.) Their backbiting and
slandering of them. (3.) Their unfaithfulness in serving of them.
(4.) Their murmuring at their lawful commands, &c.

From all these domestic iniquities, let every one depart that
religiously nameth the name of Christ. And before I leave this
head, let me, to enforce my exhortation, urge upon you a few
considerations to work with you yet further to depart from these
house iniquities.

Consider 1. A man's house, and his carriage there, doth more bespeak
the nature and temper of his mind, than all public profession.
If I were to judge of a man for my life, I would not judge of
him by his open profession, but by his domestic behaviours. Open
profession is like a man's best cloak, the which is worn by him
when he walketh abroad, and with many is made but little use of
at home. But now what a man is at home, that he is indeed. There
is abroad, my behaviour to my friends, and customers, my outward
honesty in dealing and avoiding gross sins. There is at home, my
house, my closet, my heart; and my house, my closet, shew most
what I am: though not to the world, yet to my family, and to
angels. And a good report from those most near, and most capable
of advantage to judge, is like to be truer than to have it only
from that which is gotten by my observers abroad. The outside of
the platter and cup may look well, when within they may be full
of excess. (Matt. 23:25-28) The outward shew and profession may
be tolerable, when within doors may be bad enough. I and my house
'will serve the Lord,' is the character of a godly man. (Josh.
24:15)

Consider 2. As the best judgment is made upon a man from his house,
so that man is like to have the approbation of God for good, that
is faithful in all his house. 'I know Abraham,' says God, 'that he
will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord.' (Gen. 18:15) To make religion
and the power of godliness the chief of my designs at home, among
those among whom God by a special hand has placed me, is that which
is pleasing to God, and that obtaineth a good report of him. But
to pass these, and to come to other things.

Consider 3. A master of a family, and mistress of the same, are
those that are entrusted of God with those under their tuition
and care, to be brought up for him, be they children or servants.
This is plain from the text last mentioned; wherefore here is
a charge committed to thee of God. Look to it, and consider with
thyself, whether thou hast done such duty and service for God in
this matter, as, setting common frailties aside, thou canst with
good conscience lift up thy face unto God; the which to be sure
thou canst by no means do, if iniquity, to the utmost, be not
banished out of thy house.

Consider 4. And will it not be a sad complaint that thy servant
shall take up against thee, before the Judge at the last day, that
he learnt the way to destruction in thy house, who art a professor.
Servants, though themselves be carnal, expect, when they come
into the house of professors, that there they shall see religion
in its spangling colours; but behold, when he enters thy door, he
finds sin and wickedness there. There is pride instead of humility,
and height and raillery[11] instead of meekness and holiness of
mind. He looked for a house full of virtue, and behold nothing
but spider-webs; fair and plausible abroad, but like the sow in
the mire at home. Bless me, saith such a servant, are these the
religious people! Are these the servants of God, where iniquity
is made so much of, and is so highly entertained! And now is his
heart filled with prejudice against all religion, or else he turns
hypocrite like his master and his mistress, wearing, as they, a
cloak of religion to cover all abroad, while all naked and shameful
at home. But perhaps thy heart is so hard, and thy mind so united
to the pleasing of thy vile affections, that thou wilt say, 'What
care I for my servant? I took him to do my work, not to train him
up in religion. Well, suppose the soul of thy servant be thus little
worth in thine eyes; yet what wilt thou say for thy children, who
behold all thy ways, and are as capable of drinking up the poison
of thy footsteps, as the swine is of drinking up swill: I say,
what wilt thou do for them? Children will learn to be naught of
parents, of professing parents soonest of all. They will be tempted
to think all that they do is right. I say, what wilt thou say to
this? Or art thou like the ostrich whom God hath deprived of wisdom,
and has hardened her heart against her young? (Job 39:13-17) Will
it please thee when thou shalt see that thou hast brought forth
children to the murderer? or when thou shalt hear them cry, I
learnt to go on in the paths of sin by the carriages of professing
parents.[12] (Heb. 9:13) If it was counted of old a sad thing for
a man to bring forth children to the sword, as Ephraim did, what
will it be for a man to bring up children for hell and damnation?
But,

Fifth, Let those that name the name of Christ depart from the
iniquity of THEIR CLOSET. This may be called part of the iniquity
of the house; but because it is not public, but as a retired part,
therefore I put it here by itself. There are many closets sins
that professors may be guilty of, and from which they have need
to depart. As,

1. There is the pride of a library, that is, the study or closet,
and I doubt this sin and iniquity to this day is with many great
professors, and in my judgment it is thus manifested. (l.) When
men secretly please themselves to think it is known what a stock
of books they have, or when they take more pleasure in the number
of, than the matter contained in, their books. (2.) When they
buy books rather to make up a number than to learn to be good and
godly men thereby. (3.) When, though they own their books to be
good and godly, yet they will not conform thereto.

This is an iniquity now on foot in this land, and ought to be
departed from. It is better to have no books, and depart from
iniquity, than to have a thousand, and not to be bettered in my
soul thereby.

2. There is an iniquity that attends the closet, which I may call
by the name of vacancy. When men have a closet to talk of, not to
pray in; a closet to look upon, not to bow before God in: a closet
to lay up gold in, but not to mourn in for the sins of my life;
a closet that could it speak, would say, My owner is seldom here
upon his knees before the God of heaven; seldom here humbling
himself for the iniquity of his heart, or to thank God for the
mercies of his life.

3. Then also a man is guilty of closet-iniquity, when though he
doth not utterly live in the neglect of duty, he formally, carnally,
and without reverence, and godly fear, performs it. Also, when he
asketh God for that which he cannot abide should be given him, or
when he prayeth for that in his closet, that he cannot abide in
his house, nor in his life.

4. Then also a man is guilty of closet-iniquity, when he desireth
that the sound of the devotion he doth there, may be heard by them
without in the house, the street, or of those that dwell by; for
a closet is only for the man and God to do things in secretly.
(Matt. 6:6)

These things let the professor beware of, lest he add to his
iniquity, sin, until he and it comes to be loathsome. The closet
is by God appointed for men to wait upon him in, and to do it
without hypocrisy; to wait there for his mind and his will, and
also for grace to perform it. And how can a man that went last
time out of his closet to be naught, have the face to come thither
again? If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear
my prayer; and if so, then he will not meet me in my closet; and
if so, then I shall quickly be weary thereof, being left to myself,
and the vanity of my mind.

It is a great thing to be a closet Christian, and to hold it; he
must be a close Christian, that will be a closet Christian. When
I say a closet Christian, I mean one that is so in the hidden part,
and that also walks with God. Many there be that profess Christ
who do oftener, in London[13] frequent the coffee-house than
their closet; and that sooner in a morning run to make bargains
than to pray unto God, and begin the day with him. But for thee,
who professest the name of Christ, do thou depart from all these
things; do thou make conscience of reading and practising; do thou
follow after righteousness; do thou make conscience of beginning
the day with God; for he that begins it not with him will hardly
end it with him; he that runs from God in the morning will hardly
find him at the close of the day; nor will he that begins with
the world and the vanities thereof, in the first place, be very
capable of walking with God all the day after. It is he that
finds God in his closet that will carry the savour of him into
his house, his shop, and his more open conversation. When Moses
had been with God in the mount his face shone, he brought of that
glory into the camp. (Exo. 34)

Sixth, I add again, let those that name the name of Christ depart
from the iniquity THAT CLEAVETH TO OPINIONS. This is a sad age
for that; let opinions in themselves be never so good, never so
necessary, never so innocent, yet there are spirits in the world
that will entail iniquity to them, and will make the vanity so
inseparable with the opinion, that it is almost impossible with
some to take in the opinion and leave out the iniquity, that by
the craft and subtility of Satan is joined thereto. Nor is this
a thing new, and of yesterday; it has been thus almost in all
ages of the church of God, and that not only in things small and
indifferent, but in things fundamental and most substantial. I
need instance in none other for proof thereof, but the doctrine
of faith and holiness. If faith be preached as that which is
absolutely necessary to justification, then faith fantastical, and
looseness and remissness in life, with some, are joined therewith.
If holiness of life be preached as necessary to salvation, then
(they say that) faith is undervalued, and set below its place, and
works as to justification, with God set up and made co-partners
with Christ's merits in the remission of sins. Thus iniquity
joineth itself with the great and most substantial truths of the
gospel, and it is hard to receive any good opinion whatever, but
iniquity will join itself thereto. (Eph. 5:12, 13) Wicked spirits
do not only tempt men to transgress the moral law, but do present
themselves in heavenly things, working there, and labouring in them,
to wrest the judgment, and turn the understanding and conscience
awry in those high and most important things. Wherefore, I say,
we must be the more watchful and careful lest we be abused in our
notions and best principles, by the iniquities that join themselves
thereto.

It is strange to see at this day how, not withstanding all the
threatenings of God, men are wedded to their own opinions, beyond
what the law of grace and love will admit. Here is a Presbyter,
here is an Independent, and a Baptist, so joined each man to his own
opinion, that they cannot have that communion one with another,
as by the testament of the Lord Jesus they are commanded and
enjoined. What is the cause? Is the truth? No? God is the author
of no confusion in the church of God. (1 Cor. 14:33) It is, then,
because every man, makes too much of his own opinion, abounds too
much in his own sense, and takes not care to separate his opinion
from the iniquity that cleaveth thereto. That this confusion is
in the church of Christ, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas,
and I of Christ, is too manifest. But what unbecoming language
is this for the children of the same father, members of the same
body, and heirs of the same glory, to be accustomed to? Whether
is it pride, or hypocrisy, or ignorance, or self, or the devil,
or the jesuit, or all these jointly working with the church, that
makes and maintains these names of distinction? This distinction
and want of love, this contempt of one another, those base and
undervaluing thoughts of brethren, will be better seen, to the
shame and confusion of some, in the judgment.

In the meantime, I advise thee with whom I am at this time concerned,
to take heed of this mixture, this sinful mixture of truth and
iniquity together; and to help thee in this thing, keep thine eye
much upon thine own base self, labour also to be sensible of the
imperfections that cleave to thy best performances, be clothed
with humility, and prefer thy brother before thyself; and know that
Christianity lieth not in small matters, neither before God, nor
understanding men. And it would be well if those that so stickle
by their private and unscriptural notions, which only is iniquity
cleaving to truth,--I say, it would be well if such were more
sound in faith and morals, and if by their lives they gave better
conviction to the world that the truth and grace of Christ is in
them.

Sometimes so much iniquity is mixed with good opinions, that it
prevails, not only to hurt men in this world, but to drown them
in misery everlasting. It was good that the Jews did own and allow
the ceremonies of the law, but since the iniquity that joined itself
thereto did prevail with them to make those ceremonies copartners
with Christ in those matters that pertained to Christ alone,
therefore they perished in them. The Galatians also, with many of
the Corinthians, had like to have been overthrown by these things.
Take heed, therefore, of that iniquity that seeketh to steal with
the truth into thy heart, thy judgment, and understanding.

Nor doth one iniquity come without another; they are linked
together, and come by companies, and therefore usually they that
are superstitious in one thing, are corrupted in several other.
The more a man stands upon his points[14] to justify himself and
to condemn his holy brethren, the more danger he is in of being
overcome of diverse evils. And it is the wisdom of God to let
it be so, that flesh might not glory in his presence. 'His soul,
which is lifted up,' (Hab. 2:4) to wit, with his good doings,
with his order and methods in religion, 'his soul is not upright
in him.' I have often said in my heart, What is the reason that
some of the brethren should be so shy of holding communion with
those every whit us good, if not better than themselves? Is it
because they think themselves unworthy of their holy fellowship?
No, verily; it is because they exalt themselves, they are leavened
with some iniquity that hath mixed itself with some good opinions
that they hold, and therefore it is that they say to others,
'Stand by thyself, come not near to me, for I am holier than thou.'
(Isa. 65:5) But what is the sentence of God concerning those? Why,
these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the day.
Wherefore, as I said before, so I say now again, take heed of the
iniquity that cleaveth to good opinions; the which thou wilt in
nowise be able to shun unless thou be clothed with humility.[15]
But,

Seventh, Let them that name the name of Christ depart from HYPOCRISIES.
This exhortation is as the first, general; for hypocrisies are
of that nature, that they spread themselves as the leprosy of the
body, all over; not the faculties of the soul only, but all the
duties of a man. So that here is a great iniquity to be parted
from, an over-spreading iniquity. This sin will get into all thy
profession, into every whit of it, and will make the whole of it
a loathsome stink in the nostrils of God. Hypocrisy will be in
the pulpit, in conference, in closets, in communion of saints,
in faith, in love, in repentance, in zeal, in humility, in alms,
in the prison, and in all duties. (Ezek. 8:12; Mal. 2:2; Matt.
6:2; 8:20, 21; 23:15; Luke 12:1, 2; 20:19, 20; 1 Cor. 13:3; 2
Cor. 6:6; Col. 2:23; 2 Tim. 1:5) So that here is, for the keeping
of thy soul upright and sincere, more than ordinary diligence to
be used. Hypocrisy is one of the most abominable of iniquities.
It is a sin that dares it with God. It is a sin that saith God
is ignorant, or that he delighteth in iniquity. It is a sin that
flattereth, that dissembleth, that offereth to hold God, as it were,
fair in hand, about that which is neither purposed nor intended.
It is also a sin that puts a man upon studying and contriving to
beguile and deceive his neighbour as to the bent and intent of
the heart, and also as to the cause and end of actions. It is a
sin that persuadeth a man to make a show of civility, morality,
or Christian religion, as a cloak, a pretence, a guise to deceive
withal. It will make a man preach for a place and praise, rather
than to glorify God and save souls; it will put a man upon talking,
that he may be commended; it will make a man, when he is at prayer
in his closet, strive to be heard without doors; it will make a
man ask for that he desireth not, and show zeal in duties, when
his heart is as cold, as senseless, and as much without savour
as a clod; it will make a man pray to be seen and heard of men,
rather than to be heard of God; it will make a man strive to weep
when he repenteth not, and to pretend much friendship when he doth
not love; it will make a man pretend to experience and sanctification
when he has none, and to faith and sincerity when he knows not
what they are. There is opposed to this sin simplicity, innocency,
and godly sincerity, without which three graces thou wilt be a
hypocrite, let thy notions, thy knowledge, thy profession, and
commendations from others, be what they will.

Helps against this sin there are many, some of which I shall now
present thee with. (Psa. 16:2; 21:2; Luke 16:15). 1. Believe that
God's eye is always upon thy heart, to observe all the ways, all
the turnings and windings of it. 2. Believe that he observeth all
thy ways and marks thy actions. 'The ways of man are before the
eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.' (Prov. 5:21)
3. Believe that there is a day of judgment a-coming, and that
then all things shall be revealed and discovered as they are. 'For
there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed; neither hid
that shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in
darkness shall be heard in the light, and that which ye have spoken
in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the house-tops.'
(Luke 22:2,3) 4. Believe that a hypocrite, with the cunning and
shrouds for his hypocrisy, can go unseen no further than the grave,
nor can he longer flatter himself with thoughts of life. For 'the
triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite
but for a moment. Though his excellency mount up to the heavens,
and his head reach unto the clouds; yet he shall perish for ever,
like his own dung: they which have seen him shall say, Where is
he? He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found; yea, he
shall be chased away as a vision of the night.' (Job 20:5-8) 5.
Believe that God will not spare a hypocrite in the judgment, no,
nor punish him neither with ordinary damnation; but as they have
here sinned in a way by themselves, so there they shall receive
greater damnation. (Luke 20:47)

Of all sins, the sin of hypocrisy bespeaks a man most in love with
some lust, because he dissembleth both with God and man to keep
it.

For a conclusion upon this sevenfold answer to the question above
propounded, let me advise those that are tender of the name of
Christ, to have regard to these things.

Advice First, as well acquainted with the Word, and with the general
rules of holiness; to wit, with the moral law; the want of this
is a cause of much unholiness of conversation. These licentious
and evil times wherein we live are full of iniquity; nor can we,
though we never so much love God, do our duty, as we are enjoined,
if we do not know it. The law is cast behind the back of many, when
it should be carried in the hand and heart, that we might do it,
to the end [that] the gospel which we profess might be glorified
in the world. Let then the law be with thee to love it, and do it
in the spirit of the gospel, that thou be not unfruitful in thy
life. Let the law, I say, be with thee, not as it comes from
Moses, but from Christ; for though thou art set free from the law
as a covenant of life, yet thou still art under the law to Christ;
and it is to be received by thee as out of his hand, to be a rule
for thy conversation in the world. (1 Cor. 9:18) What then thou
art about to do, do it or leave it undone, as thou shalt find it
approved or forbidden by the law. And when ought shall come into
thy mind to be done, and thou art at a stand, and at a loss about
the lawfulness or unlawfulness thereof, then betake thyself to
the law of thy God, which is in thy hand, and ask if this thing
be good or to be avoided. If this were practised by professors,
there would not be so much iniquity found in their beds, their
houses, their shops, and their conversations, as there is.

Advice Second, As thou must be careful to find out the lawfulness
or unlawfulness of a thing before thou puttest forth thy hand
thereto, so thou must also consider again whether that which is
lawful is expedient. A thing may be lawful in itself, and may yet
be unlawful to thee; to wit, if there be an inconveniency, or an
inexpediency attending the doing of it. 'All things are lawful
unto me,' says the apostle, 'but all things are not expedient;
all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.' (1 Cor.
6:12; 10:23) This then thou must consider, and this also thou must
practise.

But this is a hard lesson, and impossible to be done, except thou
art addicted to self-denial; for this text, and so the practice
of what is contained therein, has respect chiefly to another, to
wit, to thy neighbour, and his advantage and edification; and it
supposeth, yea, enjoineth thee, if thou wilt depart from iniquity,
to forbear also some things that are lawful, and consequently
profitable to thee, for the sake of, and of love to, thy neighbour.
But how little of this is found among men? Where is the man that
will forbear some lawful things, for fear of hurting the weak
thereby? Alas! how many are there that this day profess, that
will not forbear palpable wickedness; no, though the salvation of
their own souls are endangered thereby; and how then should these
forbear things that are lawful, even of godly tenderness to the
weakness of their neighbour?

Thus much have I thought good to speak in answer to this question,
What iniquity should we depart from that religiously name the name
of Christ? And now we will make some use of what hath been spoken.

USE FIRST. And the first shall be a use of examination. Art thou
a professor? Dost thou religiously name the name of Christ? If
so, I ask, dost thou, according to the exhortation here, 'Depart
from iniqnity?' I say, examine thyself about this matter, and be
thou faithful in this work, for the deceit in this will fall upon
thine own pate. Deceive thyself thou mayest, but beguile God thou
shalt not. 'Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever
a man soweth, that shall he also reap.' (Gal. 6:7) Wherefore
let no man deceive himself, either in professing while he lives
viciously, or in examining whether his profession of this name, and
his life, and conversation, do answer one another. What departing
from iniquity is, I have already showed in the former part of this
book; wherefore I shall not here handle that point farther, only
press upon thee the necessity of this exhortation, and the danger
of the not doing of it faithfully. The necessity of it is urged,

First, From the deceitfulness of man's heart which will flatter
him with promises of peace and life, both now and hereafter, though
he live in iniquity while he professeth the name of Christ. For
there are that say in their hearts, or that have their hearts say
unto them, 'I shall have peace though I walk in the imagination
of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst.' (Deut. 29:19) And
what will become of them that so do, you may see by that which
followeth in the text. The heart therefore is not to be trusted,
for it will promise a man peace in the way of death and damnation.
I doubt not but many are under this fearful judgment to this day.
What means else their quietness of mind, their peace and boasts
of heaven and glory, though every step they take, as to life and
conversation, is an apparent step to hell and damnation, 'The
heart is deceitful.' (Jer. 17:9) and, 'He that trusteth in his
own heart is a fool.' (Prov. 28:26) These sayings were not written
without a cause. Let as many, therefore, as would examine themselves
about this matter, have a jealous eye over their own heart, and
take heed of being beguiled thereby; let them mix hearty prayer
with this matter unto God, that he will help them to be faithful
to themselves in this so great a matter; yea, let them compare
their lives with the holy commandment, and judge by that rather
than by the fleshly fondness that men naturally are apt to have
for, and of, their own actions; for by the verdict of the Word
thou must stand and fall, both now, at death, and in the day of
judgment. Take heed, therefore, of thy heart, thy carnal heart,
when thou goest into thy life, to make a search for iniquity.
Take the Word with thee, and by the Word do thou examine thyself.
(John 12:48)

Second, It is urged from the cunning of Satan. Wouldest thou
examine thyself faithfully as to this thing, then take heed of
the flatteries of the devil: can he help it, thou shalt never find
out the iniquity of thy heels. He will labour to blind thy mind,
to harden thy heart, to put such virtuous names upon thy foulest
vices, that thou shalt never, unless thou stoppest thine ear to
him, after a godly sort, truly examine and try thy ways, according
as thou art commanded. (Lam. 3:40; 2 Cor. 13:5) Wherefore take
heed of him, for he will be ready at thy side when thou goest
about this work. Now for thy help in this matter, set God, the
holy God, the all-seeing God, the sin--revenging God, before thine
eyes; 'for our God is a consuming fire.' (Heb. 12:29) And believe
that he hath pitched his eyes upon thy heart; also that 'he pondereth
all thy goings,' and that thy judgment, as to thy faithfulness,
or unfaithfulness, in this work, must proceed out of the mouth of
God. (Prov. 5:21; 21:2) This will be thy help in this thing, that
is, if thou usest it faithfully; also this will be thy hindrance,
if thou shalt neglect it, and suffer thyself to be abused by the
devil.

Third, It is urged from the dangerousness of the latter days.
Wouldst thou examine thyself, then make not the lives of others
any rule to thee in this matter. It is prophesied long ago, by
Christ and by Paul, concerning the latter times, 'that iniquity
shall abound, and be very high among professors.' (Matt. 24:12; 2
Tim. 3:1-8) Therefore it will be a rare thing to find an exemplary
life among professors. Wherefore cease from man, and learn of the
Word, try thyself by the Word, receive conviction from the Word;
and to take off thyself from taking of encouragement from others,
set the judgment before thine eyes, and that account that God will
demand of thee then; and know that it will be but a poor excuse
of thee to say, Lord, such a one doth so, did so, would do so:
and they professed, &c. Whether thou wilt hear me or not, I know
not, yet this I know, 'If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for
thyself: but if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.' (Prov.
9:12)

Let me then, to press this use further upon thee, show thee in
a few particulars the danger of not doing of it, that is, of not
departing from iniquity, since thou professest.

Danger 1. The iniquity that cleaveth to men that profess, if they
cast it not away, but countenance it, will a11 prove nettles and
briars to them; and I will assure thee, yea, thou knowest, that
nettles and thorns will sting and scratch but ill-favouredly. 'I
went,' saith Solomon, 'by the field of the slothful, and by the
vineyard of the man void of understanding. And lo, it was all
grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof,
and the stone wall thereof was broken down.' (Prov. 24:30, 31)

Suppose a man were, after work all day, to be turned into a bed of
nettles at night: or after a man had been about such a business,
should be rewarded with chastisements of briars and thorns: this
would for work be but little help, relief, or comfort to him; why
this is the reward of a wicked man, of a wicked professor from
God; nettles and thorns are to cover over the face of his vineyard,
his field, his profession, and that at the last of all; for this
covering over the face of his vineyard, with nettles and thorns,
is to show what fruit the slovenly, slothful, careless professor,
will reap out; of his profession, when reaping time shall come.

Nor can he whose vineyard, whose profession is covered over with
these nettles and thorns of iniquity, escape being afflicted with
them in his conscience: for look as they cover the face of his
vineyard through his sloth now, so will they cover the face of his
conscience, in the day of judgment. For profession and conscience
cannot be separated long; if a man then shall make profession without
conscience of God's honour in his conversation, his profession
and conscience will meet in the day of his visitation. Nor will
he, whose condition this shall be, be able to ward off the guilt
and sting of a slothful and bad conversation, from covering the
face of his conscience, by retaining in his profession the name
of Jesus Christ: for naming and professing of the name of Christ
will, instead of salving such a conscience, put venom, sting, and
keenness into those nettles and thorns, that then shall be spread
over the face of such consciences. This will be worse than was
that cold wet cloth that Hazael took and spread over the face of
Benhadad, that he died. (2 Kings 8:15) This will sting worse, tear
worse, torment worse, kill worse. Therefore look to it!

Danger 2. Nor may men shift this danger by their own neglect of
inquiring into the truth of their separation from iniquity, for
that God himself will search them. I search the reins and the
heart, saith he, 'to give unto every one of you according to your
works.' (Rev. 2:23)

There are many that wear the name of Christ for a cloak, and so
make their advantages by their iniquity; but Christ, at death
and judgment, will rend this cloak from off such shoulders, then
shall they walk naked, yea, the shame of their nakedness shall
then appear. Now since no man can escape the search of God, and
so, not his judgment; it will be thy wisdom to search thine own
ways, and to prevent judgment by judging of thyself.

Danger 3. Christ will deny those to be his that do not depart
from iniquity, though they shall name his name among the rest of
his people. 'Depart from me,' saith he, 'all you that departed
not from iniquity.' (Luke 13:25-27) Yea, they that shall name his
name religiously, and not depart from iniquity, are denied by him
all along. 1. He alloweth them not now to call him Lord. 'And why
call ye me Lord, Lord,' saith he, 'and do not, the things which I
say?' (Luke 6:46) He cannot abide to be reputed the Lord of those
that presume to profess his name, and do not depart from iniquity.
(Ezek. 20:39) The reason is, for that such do but profane his
name, and stave others off from falling in love with him and his
ways. Hence he says again 'Behold, I have sworn by my great name,
saith the Lord, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth
of any man of Judah.' (Jer. 44:26; Rom. 2:24) 2. He regardeth not
their prayers. 'If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear' my prayer. (Psa. 66:18) And if so, then whatever thou hast
at the hand of God, thou hast it, not in mercy, but in judgment,
and to work out farther thine everlasting misery. 3. He will not
regard their soul, but at the last day will cast it from him, as
a thing abhorred by him. As is evidently seen by that thirteenth
of Luke, but now noted above.

Wherefore, from these few hints, thou, whoever thou art, mayest
well perceive what a horrible thing it is to make a profession
of the name of Christ, and not to depart from iniquity. Therefore
let me exhort thee again to examine thyself, if thou hast, and
dost--since thou professest that name--depart from iniquity.

And here I would distinguish, for there is two parts in iniquity,
to wit, the guilt and filth. As for the guilt that is contracted
by iniquity, I persuade myself, no man who knows it, needs to
be bid to desire to depart from that; nay, I do believe that the
worst devil in hell would depart from his guilt, if he could,
and might: but this is it, to wit, to depart from the sweet, the
pleasure, and profit of iniquity. There are that call evil good,
iniquity good, and that of professors too: this is that to be
departed from, and these are they that are exhorted to forsake
it upon the pains and penalties before threatened. Therefore, as
I said, let such look to it, that they examine themselves if they
depart from iniquity.

And come, now thou art going about this work, let me help thee
in this matter. I. Ask thy heart, What evil dost thou see in sin?
II. How sick art thou of sin? III. What means dust thou use to
mortify thy sins? IV. How much hast thou been grieved to see others
break God's law, and to find temptations in thyself to do it?

I. For the first, There is a soul-polluting evil in iniquity.
There is a God-provoking evil in iniquity.

There is a soul-damning evil in iniquity. And until thou comest
experimentally to know these things, thou wilt have neither list,
nor will, to depart from iniquity.

II. For the second. I mean not sick with guilt, for so the damned
in hell are sick, but I mean sick of the filth, and polluting
nature of it. Thus was Moses sick of sin, thus Jabez was sick of
sin, and thus was Paul sick of sin. (Num. 11:14, 15; 1 Chron. 4:9,
10; Rom. 7:14; 2 Cor. 5:1-3; Phil. 3:10-14)

III. For the third. You know that those that are sensible of a
sickness, will look out after the means to be recovered; there is
a means also for this disease, and dost thou know what that means
is, and hast thou indeed a desire to it? yea, couldest thou be
willing even now to partake of the means that would help thee to
that means, that can cure thee of this disease? there are no means
can cure a man that is sick of sin, but glory; and the means to
come by that is Christ, and to go out of this world by the faith
of him. There is no grace can cure this disease; yes, grace doth
rather increase it; for the more grace any man has, the more is he
sick of sin; the greater an offence is iniquity to him. So then,
there is nothing can cure this disease, but glory: but immortal
glory. And dost thou desire this medicine? and doth God testify
that thy desire is true, not feigned? (2 Cor. 5:4) I know that
there are many things that do make some even wish to die: but the
question is not whether thou dost wish to die: for death can cure
many diseases: but is this that that moveth thee to desire to
depart: to wit, that thou mightest be rid, quite rid, and stripped
of a body of death, because nothing on this side the grave
can rid thee and strip thee of it. And is hope, that this day is
approaching, a reviving cordial to thee? and doth the hope of this
strike arrows into the heart of thy lusts, and draw off thy mind
and affections yet farther from iniquity.

IV. To the fourth. How much hast thou been grieved to see others
break God's law, and to find temptations in thyself to do it? 'I
beheld the transgressors, and was grieved,' said David, 'because
men kept not thy word.' (Psa. 119:158) The same also had Paul,
because of that body of sin and death which was in him. Professor,
I beseech thee be thou serious about this thing because it will
be found, when God comes to judge, that those that profess Christ,
and yet abide with their iniquity, are but wooden, earthy professors,
and none of the silver or golden ones: and so, consequently, such
as shall be vessels, not to honour, but to dishonour; not to glory,
but to shame.

USE SECOND. My next shall be a use of terror. Has God commanded
by the mouth of his holy apostles and prophets, that those that
name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity: then what
will become of those that rebel against his Word. Where the word
of a king is, there is power; and if the wrath of a king be as
the roaring of a lion, what is, and what will be the wrath of God,
when with violence it falls upon the head of the wicked?

Sirs, I beseech you consider this, namely, that the man that
professeth the name of Christ, and yet liveth a wicked life, is
the greatest enemy that God has in the world, and, consequently,
one that God, in a way most eminent, will set his face against.
Hence he threateneth such so hotly, saying, 'And the destruction
of the transgressors and of the sinner shall be together,' and
that 'they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed.' (Isa. 1:28;
33:14) But what sinners are these? why, the sinners in Zion, the
hypocrites in the church. So again the Lord shall 'purge out from
among you the rebels, and them that transgress against him.' (Ezek.
20:38) 'All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which
say, The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.' (Amos 9:10) For
though such do think that by professing of the name of Christ,
they shall prevent their going down to hell, yet they shall go
down thither, with those that have lived openly wicked and profane:
Egypt, and Judah, the circumcised with them that are not, for it
is not a profession of faith that can save them. (Jer. 9:26) 'Whom
dost thou pass in beauty,' saith God? wherein art thou bettered by
the profession, than the wicked? 'go down, and be thou laid with
the uncircumcised.' (Ezek. 32:19)

This in general; but more particularly, the wrath of God manifesteth
itself against such kind of professors. In that the gospel and
means of salvation shall not be effectual for their salvation, but
that it shall work rather quite contrary effects. It shall bring
forth, as I said, quite contrary effects. (2 Cor. 2:15, 16) As,

First, The preaching of the Word shall be to such the savour of
death unto death, and that is a fearful thing.

Second, Yea Christ Jesus himself shall be so far off from being
a savour unto them, that he shall be a snare, a trap and a gin to
catch them by the heel withal; that they may go and fall backward,
and be broken, and snared, and taken.' (Isa. 8:14, 15; 28:13)

Third, The Lord also will choose out such delusions, or such as will
best suit with the workings of their flesh, as will effectually bring
them down, with the bullocks and with the bulls to the slaughter:
yea, he will lead such forth with the workers of iniquity. (Isa.
66:3, 4; Psa. 125:5)

Fourth, Such, above all, lie open to the sin against the Holy Ghost,
that unpardonable sin, that must never be forgiven. For alas, it
is not the poor ignorant world, but the enlightened professor that
committeth the sin that shall never be forgiven.

I say, it is one enlightened, one that has tasted the good word
of God, and something of the powers of the world to come. (Heb.
6:4; 1 John 5:16) It is one that was counted a brother, that was
with us in our profession: it is such an one that is in danger
of committing of that most black and bloody sin. But yet all and
every one of those that are such are not in danger of this; but
those among these that take pleasure in unrighteousness, and that
rather than they will lose that pleasure, will commit it presumptuously.
Presumptuously, that is, against light, against convictions, against
warnings, against mercies. Or thus, a presumptuous sin is such
an one as is committed in the face of the command, in a desperate
venturing to run the hazard, or in a presuming upon the mercy of
God, through Christ, to be saved not withstanding: this is a leading
sin to that which is unpardonable, and will be found with such
professors; that do hanker after iniquity. I say, it is designed
by the devil, and suffered by the just judgment of God, to catch
and overthrow the loose and carnal gospellers. And hence it is
that David cries unto God, that he would hold him back from these
sort of sins. 'Cleanse thou me from secret faults,' says he. And
then adds, 'Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins;
let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and
I shall be innocent from the great transgression.' (Psa. 19:12,
13)

If there were any dread of God, or of his word, in the hearts of
the men of this generation, the consideration of this one test is
enough to shake them in pieces: I speak of those that name the name
of Christ, but do not depart from iniquity. But the word of God
must be fulfilled; in the last days iniquity must abound; wherefore
these days will be perilous and dangerous to professors. 'In the
last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of
their ownselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient
to parents, unthankful, unholy.' (2 Tim. 3:1, 2; Matt. 24:12)
I do the oftener harp upon this test at this time, because it is
a prediction of what shall be in the latter days, to wit, what
a sea and deluge of iniquity shall in the latter days overspread
and drown those that then shall have a form of godliness, and of
religion. So that this day is more dangerous than were the days
that have been before us. Now iniquity, even immorality, shall
with professors be in fashion, be pleaded for, be loved and more
esteemed than holiness itself. Now godliness and self denial shall
be little set by; even those very men that have a form of godliness
hate the life and power thereof; yea, they shall despise them that
are good. Now therefore ministers must not think that what they
say of the doctrine of self denial among professors, will be
much, if at all regarded. I say, regarded, so as to be loved and
put in practice by them that name the name of Christ. For the strong
hold that iniquity shall have of their affections will cause that
but little effectualness to this end will be found to attend the
preaching of the Word unto them.

But what will these kind of men do, when God that is just, God
that is holy, and God that is strong to execute his word, shall
call them to an account for these things?

Now some may say, But what shall we do to depart from iniquity?
I answer,

1. Labour to see the odiousness and unprofitableness thereof, which
thou mayest do by the true knowledge of the excellent nature of
the holiness of God. For until thou seest a beauty in holiness,
thou canst not see odiousness in sin and iniquity. Danger thou
mayest see in sin before, but odiousness thou canst not.

2. Be much in the consideration of the power, justice, and
faithfulness of God to revenge himself on the workers of iniquity.

3. Be much in the consideration of the greatness and worth of thy
soul.

4. Be often asking of thyself what true profit did I ever get by
the commission of any sin.

5. Bring thy last day often to thy bedside.

6. Be often thinking of the cries and roarings of the damned in
hell.

7. Be often considering the lastingness of the torments of hell.

8. Be often thinking what would those that are now in hell give
that they might live their lives over again.

9. Consider often of the frailty of thy life, and that there is
no repentance to be found in the grave, whither thou goest.

10. Consider that hell is a doleful place, and that the devils
are but uncomfortable companions.

11. Again, consider together with those how the patience of God
has been abused by thee; yea, how all his attributes have been
despised by thee, who art a professor, that does not depart from
iniquity.

13. Moreover, I would ask with what face thou canst look the Lord
Jesus in the face, whose name thou hast profaned by thine iniquity?

13. Also, how thou wilt look on those that are truly godly, whose
hearts thou has grieved, while they have beheld the dirt and dung
that hath cloven to thee and to thy profession.

14. But especially consider with thyself how thou wilt bear,
together with thine own, the guilt, of the damnation of others.
For as I have often said, a professor, if he perishes, seldom
perishes alone, but casteth others down to hell with himself. The
reason is, because others, both weak professors and carnal men,
are spectators and observers of his ways; yea, and will presume
also to follow him especially in evil courses, concluding that he
is right. We read that the tail of the dragon, or that the dragon
by his tail, did draw and cast down abundance of the stars of
heaven to the earth. (Rev. 12:4; Isa. 9:14, 15) The tail! 'The
prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.' The prophet that
speaketh lies, either by opinion or practice, he is the tail, the
dragons's tail, the serpentine tail of the devil. (Isa. 9:14, 15)
And so in his order, every professor that by his iniquity draweth
both himself and others to hell, he is the tail. The tail, says
the Holy Ghost, draws them down; draws down even the stars of
heaven; but whither doth he draw them? The answer is, from heaven,
the throne of God, to earth, the seat of the dragon; for he is
the god of this world. The professor then that is dishonourable
in his profession, he is the tail. 'The ancient and honourable, he
is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.'
Nor can Satan work such exploits by any, as he can by unrighteous
professors. These he useth in his hand, as the giant useth his
club; he, as it were, drives all before him with it. It is said
of Behemoth, that 'he moveth his tail like a cedar.' (Job 40:7)
Behemoth is a type of the devil, but behold how he handleth his
tail, even as if a man should swing about a cedar. (Rev. 9:10,
19) This is spoken to shew the hurtfulness of the tail, as it is
also said in another place. Better no professor than a wicked
professor. Better open profane than a hypocritical namer of the
name of Christ; and less hurt shall such an one do to his own
soul, to the poor ignorant world, to the name of Christ, and to
the church of God.

Let professors, therefore, take heed to themselves, that they
join to their naming of the name of Christ an holy and godly
conversation; for away they must go else with the workers of
iniquity to the pit, with more guilt, and bigger load, and more
torment by far than others, But,

USE THIRD. My next word shall be to those that desire to be true,
sincere professors of the name of Christ.

First, Do you bless God, for that he has put not only his name
into your lips, but grace into your hearts, that thereby that
profession which thou makest of him may be seasoned with that
salt. 'Every sacrifice shall be seasoned with salt.' (Mark 9:49)
Now naming of the name of Christ is a sacrifice, and a sacrifice
acceptable, when the salt of the covenant of thy God is not
lacking, but mixed therewith. (Heb. 13:15; Lev. 2:13) Therefore
I say, since God has put his name into thy mouth to profess the
same, and grace into thy heart to season that profession with
such carriage, such behaviour, such life, and such conversation
as doth become the same, thou hast great cause to thank God. A man
into whose mouth God has put the name of Christ to profess it, is
as a man that is to act his part upon a stage in the market place;
if he doth it well, he brings praise both to his master and himself;
but if he doth it ill, both are brought into contempt. No greater
praise can by man be brought to God, than by joining to the
profession of the name of Christ a fruitful life and conversation.
'Herein,' saith Christ, 'is my Father glorified, that ye bear
much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples.' (John 15:8) Fruitful
lives God expecteth of all that profess the name of Christ. And
let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.
Bless God, therefore, if he hath kept thee from blotting and
blemishing of thy profession; if thy conversation has not been
stained with the blots and evils of the times. What thou feelest,
fightest with, and groanest under, by reason of the working
of thine inward corruptions, with that I meddle not; nor is thy
conversation the worse for that, if thou keepest them from breaking
out. Thou also shalt be counted holy unto God, through Christ, if
thou be of an upright conversation; though plagued every day with
the working of thine own corruption.

Ad God's grace is the salt of saints, so saints are the salt of
God. The one is the salt of God in the heart, and the other is the
salt of God in the world. 'Ye are the salt of the earth:' (Matt.
5:13) that is the salt of God in the earth. For the earth would
be wholly corrupt, and would altogether stink, if professors were
not in it. But now if the professor, which is the salt, shall indeed
lose his savour, and hath nothing in his conversation to season
that part of the earth, in which God has placed him, wherewith
shall it be seasoned? The place where he dwells, as well as his
profession, will both stink odiously in the nostrils of the Lord,
and so both come to ruin and desolation.

Indeed, as I have shewed, the professor will come to the worst of
it; for that God doth deny further to give him salt. 'If the salt
have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be seasoned?' (Luke 14:34)
Wherewith shall the salt be salted? with nothing. Therefore it
is thenceforth good for nothing. No, not for the dunghill, but to
be cast out, and trodden under foot of men. 'He that hath ears to
hear let him hear.'

How much, therefore, is the tender-hearted, and he that laboureth
to beautify his profession with a gospel conversation, bound to
bless God for the salt of his grace, by the which his heart is
seasoned, and from his heart, his conversation.

Second, As such Christians should bless God, so let them watch,
let them still watch, let them still watch and pray, watch against
Satan, and pray yet for more grace, that they may yet more and
more beautify their profession of the worthy name of Christ with
a suitable conversation. Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his
garment; that is, his conversation clean, nor is there anything,
save the overthrowing of our faith, that Satan seeketh more to
destroy. He knows holiness in them that rightly, as to doctrine,
name the name of Christ, is a maul and destruction to his kingdom,
an allurement to the ignorant, and a cutting off those occasions
to stumble, that by the dirty life of a professor is laid in the
way of the blind. (Lev. 19:14) He knows that holiness of lives,
when they shine in those that profess the name of Christ, doth
cut off his lies that he seeketh to make the world believe, and
slanders that he seeketh to fasten upon the professors of the
gospel. Wherefore, as you have begun to glorify God in your body
and in your spirit, which are God's; so I beseech you do it more
and more.

Third, To this end, shun those professors that are loose of life
and conversation: 'From such withdraw thyself,' saith Paul, and
follow 'righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call
on the Lord out of a pure heart.' (1 Tim. 6:5; 2 Tim. 2:22) If a
man, if a good man takes not good heed to himself, he shall soon
bring his soul into a snare. Loose professors are defilers and
corrupters; a man shall get nothing but a blot by having company
with them. (Isa. 1:4) Besides, as a man shall get a blot by having
much to do with such; so let him beware that his heart learn none
of their ways. Let thy company be the excellent in the earth even
those that are excellent for knowledge and conversation. 'He that
walketh with wise men shall be wise; but a companion of fools
shall be destroyed.'

Be content to be counted singular, for so thou shalt, if thou
shalt follow after righteousness, &., in good earnest; for holiness
is a rare thing now in the world. I told thee before that it is
foretold by the Word, that in the last days perilous times shall
come, and that men shall walk after their own lusts; yea, professors,
to their destruction. Nor will it be easy to keep thyself therefrom.
But even as when the pestilence is come into a place, it infecteth
and casteth down the healthful; so the iniquity of the last times
will infest and pollute the godly. I mean the generality of them.
Were but our times duly compared with those that went before,
we should see that which now we are ignorant of. Did we but look
back to the Puritans, but especially to those that, but a little
before them, suffered for the word of God, in the Marian days, we
should see another life than is now among men, another manner of
conversation than now is among professors. But, I say, predictions
and prophecies must be fulfilled; and since the Word says plainly,
that 'in the last days there shall come scoffers, walking after
their own lusts,' (2 Peter 3:17) and since the Christians shall
be endangered thereby, let us look to it, that we acquit ourselves
like men, seeing we know these things before; 'lest we, being led
away with the error of the wicked, fall from our own steadfastness.'

Singularity in godliness, if it be in godliness, no man should
be ashamed of. For that is no more than to be more godly, than
to walk more humbly with God than others; and, for my part, I had
rather be a pattern and example of piety. I had rather that my
life should be instructing to the saints, and condemning to the
world, with Noah and Lot, than to hazard myself among the multitude
of the drossy.

I know that many professors will fall short of eternal life, and
my judgment tells me, that they will be of the slovenly sort of
professors that so do. And for my part, I had rather run with the
foremost and win the prize, than come behind, and lose that, and
my labour, and all. 'If a man also strive for masteries, yet is he
not crowned, except he strive lawfully.' And when men have said
all they can, they are the truly redeemed 'that are zealous of
good works.' (1 Cor. 9:24; 2 Tim. 2:4, 5; Titus 2:14)

Not that works do save us, but faith, which layeth hold on Christ's
righteousness for justification, sanctifies the heart, and makes
men desirous to live in this world, to the glory of that Christ
who died in this world to save us from death.

For my part I doubt of the faith of many, and fear that it will
prove no better at the day of God than will the faith of devils.
For that it standeth in bare speculation, and is without life and
soul to that which is good. Where is the man that walketh with
his cross upon his shoulder? Where is the man that is zealous of
moral holiness? Indeed, for those things that have nothing of the
cross of the purse, or of the cross of the belly, or of the cross
of the back, or of the cross of the vanity of household affairs;
for those things, I find we have many, and those, very busy
sticklers; but otherwise, the cross, self denial, charity, purity
in life and conversation, is almost quite out of doors among
professors. But, man of God, do thou be singular as to these and
as to their conversation. 'Be not ye therefore partakers with them,'
(Eph. 5:7), in any of their ways, but keep thy soul diligently;
for if damage happeneth to thee, thou alone must bear it.

But he that will depart from iniquity must be well fortified
with faith, and patience, and the love of God; for iniquity has
its beauty spots and its advantages attending on it; hence it is
compared to a woman, for it allureth greatly. (Zech. 5:7) Wherefore,
I say, he that will depart therefrom had need have faith, that
being it which will help him to see beyond it, and that will shew
him more in things that are invisible, that can be found in sin,
were it ten thousand times more entangling than it is. (2 Cor.
4:18) He has need of patience also to hold out in this work of
departing from iniquity. For, indeed, to depart from that, is to
draw my mind off from that, which will follow me with continual
solicitations. Samson withstood his Delilah for a while, but she
got the mastery of him at the last; why so? Because he wanted
patience, he grew angry and was vexed, and could withstand her
solicitation no longer. (Judges 16:15-17) Many there be also, that
can well enough be contented to shut sin out of doors for a while;
but because sin has much fair speech, therefore it overcomes at
last. (Prov. 7:21) For sin and iniquity will not be easily said
nay; it is like her of whom you read--she has a whore's forehead,
and refuses to be ashamed. (Jer. 3:3) Wherefore, departing from
iniquity is a work for length, as long as life shall last. A work
did I say? It is a war; a continual combat; wherefore he that will
adventure to set upon this work must needs be armed with faith
and patience, a daily exercise he will find himself put upon by
the continual attempts of iniquity to be putting forth itself.
(Matt. 24:13; Rev. 3:10) This is called an enduring to the end, a
continuing in the word of Christ and also a keeping of the word of
his patience. But what man in the world can do this whose heart
is not seasoned with the love of God and the love of Christ?
Therefore, he that will exercise himself in this work must be
often considering of the love of God to him in Christ; for the
more sense, or apprehension, a man shall have of that, the more
easy and pleasant will this work be to him: yea, though the doing
thereof should cost him his heart's blood. 'Thy loving-kindness is
before mine eyes,' says David, 'and I have walked in thy truth.'
(Psa. 26:3) Nothing like the sense, sight, or belief of that, to
the man of God, to make him depart from iniquity.

But what shall I do, I cannot depart therefrom as I should?

Keep thine eye upon all thy shortnesses, or upon all thy failures,
for that that is profitable for thee. 1. The sight of this will
make thee base in thine own eyes. 2. It will give thee occasion
to see the need and excellency of repentance. 3. It will put
thee upon prayer to God for help and pardon. 4. It will make thee
weary of this world. 5. It will make grace to persevere the more
desirable in thine eyes.

Also, it will help thee in the things which follow:--l. It will
make thee see the need of Christ's righteousness. 2. It will make
thee see the need of Christ's intercession. 3. It will make thee
see thy need of Christ's advocateship. 4. It will make thee see the
riches of God's patience. 5. And it will make heaven and eternal
life the sweeter to thee when thou comest there.

But to the question. Get more grace, for the more grace thou hast
the further is thine heart set off of iniquity, the more, also, set
against it, and the better able to depart from it when it cometh
to thee, tempteth thee, and entreats thee for entertainment. Now
the way to have more grace is to have more knowledge of Christ,
and to pray more fervently in his name; also, to subject thy soul
and thy lusts, with all thy power, to the authority of that grace
thou hast, and to judge and condemn thyself most heartily before
God, for every secret inclination that thou findest in thy flesh
to sinward.

The improvement of what thou hast is that, as I may say, by which
God judges how thou wouldest use, if thou had it, more; and according
to that so shalt thou have, or not have, a farther measure. He that
is faithful in that which is least is faithful, and will be so,
also in much; and he that is unjust in the least, is, and will
be, unjust also in much. I know Christ speaks here about the
unrighteous mammon, but the same may be applied also unto the
thing in hand. (Luke 16:10-12)

And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's,
who will commit unto you that which is your own? That is a remarkable
place to this purpose in the Revelation--'Behold,' saith he, 'I
have set before thee an open door,' that thou mayest have what thou
wilt, as was also said to the improving woman of Canaan, 'and no
man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept
my word, and hast not denied my name.' (Rev. 3:8; Matt. 15:28)

A good improvement of what we have of the grace of God at present
pleases God, and engages him to give us more; but an ill improvement
of what we at present have will not do so. 'To him that hath,'
that hath an heart to improve what he hath, to him shall be given;
but to him that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which
he hath.' (Matt. 25:24-30) Well, weigh the place and you shall find
it so.

I know that to depart from iniquity so as is required, that is,
to the utmost degree of the requirement, no man can, for it is
a copy too fair for mortal flesh exactly to imitate while we are
in this world. But with good paper, good ink, and a good pen,
a skilful and willing man may go far. And it is well for thee if
thy complaint be sincere, to wit, that thou art troubled that thou
canst not forsake iniquity as thou shouldest; for God accepteth of
thy design and desire, and it is counted by him as thy kindness.
(Prov. 19:22) But if thy complaint in this matter be true, thou
wilt not rest nor content thyself in thy complaints, but wilt,
as he that is truly hungry or greatly burdened useth all lawful
means to satisfy his hunger and to ease himself of his burden,
use all thy skill and power to mortify and keep them under, by
the word of God. Nor can it otherwise be but that such a man must
be a growing man. 'Every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth
it, that it may bring forth more fruit' (John 15:2) Such a man
shall not be a stumbling in religion, nor a scandal to it, in
his calling; but shall, according to God's ordinary way with his
people, be a fruitful and flourishing bough.

And I would to God this were the sickness of all them that profess
in this nation; for then should we soon have a new leaf turned over
in most corners of this nation; then would graciousness of heart,
and life, and conversation be more prized, more sought after,
and better improved and practised than it is; yea, then would the
throats of ungodly men be better stopt, and their mouths faster
shut up, as to their reproaching of religion, than they are.
A Christian man must be the object of the envy of the world; but
it is better, if the will of God be so, that we be reproached
for well-doing than for evil. (1 Peter 2:3) If we be reproached
for evil-doing, it is our shame; but if for well-doing, it is our
glory. If we be reproached for our sins, God cannot vindicate
us; but if we be reproached for a virtuous life, God himself is
concerned, will espouse our quarrel, and, in his good time, will
shew our foes our righteousness, and put them to shame and silence.
Briefly, a godly life annexed to faith in Christ is so necessary,
that a man that professes the name of Christ is worse than a beast
without it.

But thou wilt say unto me, Why do men profess the name of Christ
that love not to depart from iniquity? I answer, there are
many reasons for it. 1. The preaching of the gospel, and so the
publication of the name of Christ, is musical and very taking to
the children of men. A Saviour! a Redeemer! a loving, sin-pardoning
Jesus! what better words can come from man? what better melody
can be heard? 'Son of man,' said God to the prophet, 'Lo, thou
art unto them as a very lovely song'; or, as a song of loves, 'of
one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument.'
(Ezek. 33:32) The gospel is a most melodious note and sweet tune to
any that are not prepossessed with slander, reproach, and enmity
against the professors of it. Now, its melodious notes being
so sweet, no marvel if it entangle some even of them that yet
will not depart from iniquity to take up and profess so lovely a
profession. But,

2. There are a generation of men that are and have been frightened
with the law, and terrified with fears of perishing for their sins,
but yet have not grace to leave them. Now, when the sound of the
gospel shall reach such men's ears, because there is by that made
public the willingness of Christ to die for sin, and of God to
forgive them for his sake; therefore they presently receive and
profess those notions as the only ones that can rid them from their
frights and terrors, falsely resting themselves content with that
faith thereof which standeth in naked knowledge; yea, liking of
that faith best that will stand with their pride, covetousness,
and lechery, never desiring to hear of practical holiness, because
it will disturb them; wherefore they usually cast dirt at such,
calling them legal preachers.

3. Here also is a design of Satan set on foot; for these carnal
gospellers are his tares, the children of the wicked one; those
that he hath sowed among the wheat of purpose, if possible, that
that might be rooted up by beholding and learning to be vile and
filthy of them. (Matt. 13:36-43)

4. Another cause hereof is this, the hypocrites that begin to
profess find as bad as themselves already in a profession of this
worthy name; and, think they, these do so and so, and, therefore,
so will I.

5. This comes to pass, also, through the righteous judgment of
God, who, through the anger that he has conceived against some
men for their sins, will lift them up to heaven before he casts
them down to hell, that their fall may be the greater and their
punishment the more intolerable. (Matt. 11:20-24) I have now done
when I have read to you my text over again--'And, let every one
that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.'



FOOTNOTES.

1. How clearly is here portrayed the wretched state of this country
towards the close of the reign of Charles II. It is the natural
eloquence of one whose very thoughts were governed by scriptural
expressions. The martyrdoms of Essex, of Russel, and of Sydney--the
uncertainty of the life of a debauched monarch, with the gloomy
prospect of a popish successor, filled the country with dismal
forebodings.--ED.

2. This is a solemn truth, which ought ever to be recollected when
studying the mysteries of electing love. Election is as much to
a holy life as it is to eternal glory.-ED.

3. How much is it to be feared that some towering professors,
upon impartial self-examination, will find upon themselves some
of these black spots; all of which are utterly inconsistent with
that humility which is the proper and only becoming garb of a
Christian.--Ryland--ED.

4. Selfishness is the great enemy to happiness. A heart steeled
against all, naturally brings upon itself the hostility of all.
Love to the Redeemer, for emancipation from that great curse, is
the only antidote to selfishness.--ED.

5. 'Power of things;' the influence of convictions and hopes named
in the six divisions on the preceding page.--ED.

6. Plato says that some men are impotent by reason of sin; but
Christianity alone develops the awful fact, that sin has poisoned
our nature, and that its effects are felt in the holiest of saints.
The reference to the experience of Paul in Romans 8 is conclusive
of the fact.--ED.

7. 'Letteth;' hindereth or obstructeth: now obsolete.--ED.

8. 'Slow bellies;' gluttons, drunkards, slothful, idle, eating
the bread of others without working.--ED.

9. Margin.

10. Fox 1st edit., p. 1432.

11. 'Raillery;' jesting, merriment.

12. A Christian parent has peculiar and solemn duties to perform,
in addition to those of every other class of Christians. This ought
to lead him perpetually to seek wisdom from his heavenly Father;
and in such close communion he becomes as peculiarly blessed as
he is burthened.--ED.

13. Bunyan was in the habit of visiting London, the seat of
government, and doubtless saw a sad change in the conduct of many
professors, under a profligate monarch, to what it had been under
the pious protector.--ED

14. 'His points;' an heraldic term, expressive of the exact position
of the various bearing on the shield--a scrupulous or superstitious
niceness as to points of doctrine.--ED.

15. These are faithful words, giving offence to bigots of every
sect. The church of England excluded all from her communion except
conformists--Independents held no fellowship with Baptists, nor
Baptists with Independents. Happily, Christians are coming to
their senses. The Test Act is repealed--nor dare we now call that
unclean which God has cleansed.--ED.

***

CHRISTIAN BEHAVIOR

Being the fruits of true Christianity:

Teaching husbands, wives, parents, children, masters, servants, etc.,
how to walk so as to please God.

With a word of direction to all backsliders.


Advertisement by the Editor

This valuable practical treatise, was first published as a pocket
volume about the year 1674, soon after the author's final release
from his long and dangerous imprisonment. It is evident from the
concluding paragraph that he considered his liberty and even his
life to be still in a very uncertain state; not from the infirmities
of age, for he was then in the prime of life; but from the tyranny
of the government, and probably from the effects of his long
incarceration in a damp, unhealthy jail. It is the best and most
scriptural guide that has ever appeared to aid us in the performance
of relative duties: written with originality of thought and that
peculiar and pious earnestness which so distinguishes all his works.

No one can read this book, without finding in it his own portrait
truly and correctly drawn to the life. Many have been the hearers
of the word in its public ministration, who have been astonished
that a faithful minister has not only opened their outward conduct,
but the inward recesses of their heartsand have inquired with
wonder, 'Where could he get such a knowledge of my heart?' The usages
and feelings of every part of the human family the rich and poor
outward professors or openly profane God fearers or God defiersare
displayed in the following pages as accurately as if the author had
been present in every family upon earth, and had not only witnessed
the conduct of the happy and of the miserable in every grade; but
he goes within and unvails that mystery of iniquity the human heart,
its secret springs, feelings, and machinations. What mysterious
power could this uneducated man have possessed, thus to dive
into the most subtle of all secret repositories, the human heart!
Could he have left his body at times and his invisible spirit
have entered all chambers, as was said of an ancient philosopher,
1 still time would have been too short even to have transiently
surveyed outward conduct; and then he could not have entered into
the thoughts of others. Reader, the fountain of all hidden things
was open to him. Shut up for many years in prison, with the key
in his possession which unlocks all the mysteries of earth, and
heaven, and hellhe diligently used his time and all was revealed
to him. He makes the source of his knowledge no secret, but invites
you to search, as he did, this storehouse of things new and old.
It was the Bible which unfolded to him all the great events of time
and of eternity all the secret springs of states, and families, and
individuals wonderous book! It made an uneducated artizan wiser than
all the philosophers who have been contented with Plato, Aristotle,
Pliny, Plutarch, and the most renowned of human writers. Not only
is the real state of human nature revealed with unerring truth, as
suffering under a cruel malady, strangely diverse in its operations,
but all tending to the downward, dark, dreary road to misery temporal
and eternal: but it also displays the antidote; an infallible remedy
against all the subtilties of this tortuous disease. Reader, this
treasure is in our hands. How great is the responsibility. How
blessed are those who with earnest prayer for divine illumination
read ponder and relying upon the aid of the Holy Spirit, understand
and instantly obey the sacred precepts which its pages unfold.
Weigh well their nature and tendency, as Bunyan opens them in
this invaluable treatise. They lead step by step from darkness to
light. It may be a tempestuous passage in the dim twilight, as it
was with him but it is safe and leads to the fountain of happiness
the source of blessedness the presence and smiles of God and the
being conformed to his image. In proportion as we are thus transformed
in our minds, we shall be able to fulfil all our duties and behavior
as becometh Christians. We dare not seek to avoid these duties
because they are full of anxieties. Blessed are those who know and
feel the ties of church fellowship or the nearer union of husband
and wife, that type of the mystical union of Christ and his church.
Happy are those who piously discharge parental and filial duties,
that figure of the relationship which the Almighty, in infinite
condescension, owns between him and his fallen but renewed creatures.
Vows of celibacy disturb all the order and harmonies of creation,
and are fleshly, sensual, devilish. The unmarried are strangers
to those delightful or painful sensibilities which drive the soul
to continual converse with God, either in heart-felt praises or
for divine assistance to glorify him in the discharge of domestic
duties. They who vow celibacy, fly in the face of the infinitely
wise eternal, who said, 'It is not good for man to be alone.' He
sets up his puny antagonism to omnipotence. It is true, that in
the prospect of the desolations which were foretold by the Saviour
and were about to be poured out upon Jerusalem, 'for the present
distress,' 'the short time' Paul advised, not commanded, a temporary
deviation from the order of naturelike an eclipse of the sun or
moonfor a 'short time' which no one could wish to be prolonged.
We are bound, in the expectation of the divine approbation, not to
shrink from duties, but to seek wisdom to fulfil them; and in this
little work we have a scriptural guide to which we shall do well
to take heed. It is a peculiarly solemn legacythe author's ardent
desire is thus expressed; 'Before I die [as the greatest of all the
duties he had to perform] let me provoke you to faith and holiness.'
Be it our duty and privilege to examine our conduct faithfully by
those portions of holy writ, with which this treatise is beautifully
adorned. It was written in the prospect of sufferings and death,
and yet how serene was his soul. No cloud, no doubts or fears are
seen; his legacy to us as well as to those who survived him is,
'Love one another when I am deceased.' My labours of love to you
are limited to this world. 'Though there I shall rest from my
labours, and be in paradise, as through grace, I comfortably believe;
yet it is not there but here I must do you good.' Consider what
he has advanced, and the scriptures by which every sentence is
confirmed, and may his concluding and fervent prayer be answered to
our souls: 'The Lord give us understanding in all things. Farewell.'

GEO. OFFOR.




The Epistle to the Reader

Courteous Reader,

Having formerly writ some small matter touching the doctrine
of faith, as justification by grace through the faith of Christ's
blood, &c., I do here, as the second to that doctrine, present thee
with a few lines touching good works, that I might, as at first
I showed thee the good and glory of the one, so now show thee the
beauty and excellency of the other: for though we are justified
freely by grace through Christ before God (Rom 3:24, &c.); yet we
are justified before men by our works (James 2:18): nay, a life of
holiness flowing from faith in us that are saved by grace, it doth
justify that grace before the world, that justifies us before God
(2 Cor 6:1,3; 9:12,13; 1 Peter 2:11,12).

I have not here only in general treated of this doctrine of good
works, but particularly, after some discourse about works flowing
from faith, and what makes it truly and gospelly good, I discourse
of them as we stand under our several relations in this world among
men.

As, The duty of the master of a family: Of the husband to his wife;
and of hers to him: Of the duty of parents to their children; and
of children to their parents: Of masters also to their servants; and
of the servant again to his master: with a brief touch upon good
neighbourhood; and a discovery of covetousness, pride, and uncleanness,
which are great obstructions to a truly gospel conversation.

I know there are many that have treated of good works in large and
learned discourses; but I doubt all have not so gospelized their
discourses as becomes them, and as the doctrine of the grace of God
calleth for. However, I thought it my duty to add this discourse
to all that are past; and that for these reasons.

1. To take away those aspersions that the adversaries cast upon
our doctrineas also in the days of Paulthat because we preach
justification without works of the law; therefore they pretend we
plead for looseness of life: 'whose damnation is just' (Rom 3:8).

2. Because, though there be much discourse about works in general, yet
a particular discourse of them, as before is touched, is too much
neglected; and by this means every one too much left at uncertainties
(as from them) of their several works under their particular
relations; which I think is one reason of that disorder in families
and places where God's people live; to their shame, and the dishonour
of God.

3. Because these few books that do particularly treat thus of
good works, are, I think, now so scarce, or so big, that but few
have them, and few buy them, if they may be had, especially our
new converts, for whose sakes principally this short discourse is
intended; and indeed, this is one reason of my brevity, that the
price might neither be burdensome, nor the reading long and tedious.
Multitude of words drown the memory; and an exhortation in few words
may yet be so full, that the reader may find that in one side of a
sheet, which some are forced to hunt for in a whole book. The Lord
teach us this wisdom.

4. I have written this book, to show that I bear a fellow-testimony
and witness, with all that know God, of the operation that grace
hath, and will have, in the heart that hath savingly received it.

Lastly, I have thus written, because it is amiable and pleasant to
God, when Christians keep their rank, relation, and station, doing
all as becometh their quality and calling. When Christians stand
every one in their places, and do the work of their relations, 2
then they are like the flowers in the garden, that stand and grow
where the gardener hath planted them, and then they shall both
honour the garden in which they are planted, and the gardener that
hath so disposed of them. From the hyssop in the wall, to the cedar
in Lebanon, their fruit is their glory. 3 And seeing the stock into
which we are planted, is the fruitfullest stock, the sap conveyed
thereout the fruitfullest sap, and the dresser of our souls the
wisest husbandman, (John 15:1) how contrary to nature, to example,
and expectation, should we be, if we should not be rich in good
works!

Wherefore take heed of being painted fire, wherein is no warmth;
and painted flowers, which retain no smell; and of being painted
trees, whereon is no fruit. 'Whoso boasteth himself of a false
gift, is like clouds and wind without rain' (Prov 25:14). Farewell.

The Lord be with thy spirit, that thou mayest profit for time to
come.

J. BUNYAN.
Christian Behavior

'THAT BEING JUSTIFIED BY HIS GRACE, WE SHOULD BE MADE HEIRS ACCORDING
TO THE HOPE OF ETERNAL LIFE. THIS IS A FAITHFUL SAYING, AND THESE
THINGS I WILL THAT THOU AFFIRM CONSTANTLY, THAT THEY WHICH HAVE
BELIEVED IN GOD MIGHT BE CAREFUL TO MAINTAIN GOOD WORKS. THESE
THINGS ARE GOOD AND PROFITABLE UNTO MEN.'TITUS 3:7,8.

I shall not at this time discourse of every particular at large
included in these words; but shall briefly fall upon those things
that I judge most necessary for the people of God. Neither shall I
need to make any great preamble to the words for their explication;
they themselves being plain, and without that ambiguity that
calleth for such a thing; the general scope being this, THAT THEY
WHICH HAVE BELIEVED IN GOD SHOULD BE CAREFUL TO MAINTAIN GOOD WORKS.

But yet, to prosecute what I intend, with what clearness I may, I
shall in a word or two make way for what is to be the main of this
book. 'This is a faithful saying.' This; Which? Why, that which
goeth before, namely, 'That being justified by his grace, we should
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. This is a
faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly.'

Why so?

Why, 'That they which have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good works.' The meaning is, that the way to provoke others
to good works, is constantlyin the evidence and demonstration of
the spiritto show them the certainty of their [these believers]
being by grace made heirs of eternal life.

From this scripture, therefore, I do gather these things observable.

FIRST, That good works do flow from faith. Yea,

SECOND, That every one that believeth should be careful that their
works be good.

THIRD, That every believer should not only be careful that their
works be good, and for the present do them, but should also be
careful to maintain them; that is, they should carefully study to
keep in a constant course of good works.

FOURTH, and lastly, That the best way to provoke both ourselves
and others to this work, it is to be often affirming to others the
doctrine of justification by grace, and to believe it ourselves:
'This is a faithful saying, and these things I will,' saith Paul,
'that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God
might be careful to maintain good works.'

FIRST. I begin with the first. That good works do flow from faith.
This is evident divers ways.

First, From the impossibility of their flowing from any other thing;
they must either flow from faith, or not at all: 'For whatsoever
is not of faith, is sin' (Rom 14:23). And again, 'Without faith
it is impossible to please him' (Heb 11:6). Every man by nature,
before faith, is an evil and a corrupt tree; and a corrupt tree
cannot bring forth good fruit: 'Do men gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles?' (Matt 7:16,17). Now a man is made good by
faith, and by that bringeth forth the fruits that are acceptable
to God (Heb 11:4; Col 1:4-6).

Wherefore sinners, before faith, are compared to the wilderness, whose
fruits are briars and thorns; and whose hearts are the habitation
of dragons; that is, of devils 4 (Isa 35:6,7; Heb 6:7,8).

And hence again it is, that they are said to be Godless, Christless,
Spiritless, faithless, hopeless; without the covenant of grace,
without strength; enemies in their minds by wicked works, and
possessed by the spirit of wickedness, as a castle by a conqueror
(Eph 2:12; Jude 19; 2 Thess 3:2; Col 1:21; Luke 11:21).

Now, these things being thus, it is impossible that all the men
under heaven, that are unconverted, should be able to bring forth
one work rightly good; even as impossible, as for all the briars and
thorns under heaven to bring forth one cluster of grapes, or one
bunch of figs; for indeed they want the qualification. A thorn
bringeth not forth figs, because it wanteth the nature of the
fig-tree; and so doth the bramble the nature of the vine. Good
works must come from a good heart. Now, this the unbeliever wanteth,
because he wanteth faith; for it is that which purifieth the heart
(Luke 6:45; Acts 15:9). Good works must come from love to the Lord
Jesus; but this the unbeliever wanteth also, because he wanteth
faith: For faith 'worketh by love,' and by that means doth good
(Gal 5:6).

And hence again it is, that though the carnal man doth never so
much which he calleth good, yet it is rejected, slighted, and turned
as dirt in his face again; his prayers are abominable (Prov 15:8),
his ploughing is sin (Prov 21:4), and all his righteousness as
menstruous rags (Isa 64:6).

Thus you see that without faith there are no good works.

Now then, to show you that they flow from faith: and that, For
that FAITH is a principle of life, by which a Christian lives (Gal
2:19,20), a principle of motion, by which it walks towards heaven
in the way of holiness (Rom 4:12; 2 Cor 5:7). It is also a principle
of strength, by which the soul opposeth its lust, the devil, and
this world, and overcomes them. 'This is the victory, even our
faith' (1 John 5:4,5) Faith, in the heart of a Christian, is like
the salt that was thrown into the corrupt fountain, that made the
naughty waters good, and the barren land fruitful (2 Kings 2:19-22).
Faith, when it is wrought in the heart, is like leaven hid in the
meal, (Matt 13:33) or like perfume that lighteth upon stinking
leather, turning the smell of the leather into the savour of the
perfume; faith being then planted in the heart, and having its
natural inclination to holiness. Hence it is that there followeth
an alteration of the life and conversation, and so bringeth forth
fruit accordingly. 'A good man out of the good treasure of his heart
bringeth forth that which is good' (Luke 6:45). Which treasure, I
say, is this faith (James 2:5; 1 Peter 1:7). And therefore it is
that faith is called 'the faith according to godliness,' (Titus
1:1) and the 'most holy faith' (Jude 20).

Second, Good works must needs flow from faith, or no way; because
that alone carrieth in it an argument sufficiently prevalent to
win upon our natures, to make them comply with holiness.

Faith showeth us that God loveth us, that he forgiveth us our sins,
that he accounteth us for his children, having freely justified us
through the blood of his Son (Rom 3:24,25; 4; Heb 11:13; 1 Peter
1:8).

Faith receiveth the promise, embraceth it, and comforteth the soul
unspeakably with it. Faith is so great an artist in arguing and
reasoning with the soul, that it will bring over the hardest heart
that it hath to deal with. It will bring to my remembrance at once,
both my vileness against God, and his goodness towards me; it will
show me, that though I deserve not to breathe in the air, yet that
God will have me an heir of glory.

Now, there is no argument greater than this. This will make a man
run through ten thousand difficulties, to answer God, though he
never can, for the grace he hath bestowed on him.

Further, FAITH will show me how distinguishingly this love of God
hath set itself upon me; it will show me, that though Esau was
Jacob's brother, yet he loved Jacob (Mal 1:2). That though there
were thousands more besides me that were as good as me, yet I must
be the man that must be chosen.

Now this, I say, is a marvellous argument, and unspeakably prevaileth
with the sinner, as saith the apostle: 'For the love of Christ
constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all,
then were all dead: And that he died for all; that they which live,'
that is, by faith, 'should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him which died for them, and rose again' (2 Cor 5:14,15).
'Love,' saith the wise man, 'is strong as death; Many waters cannot
quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a man would give
all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned'
(Song 8:6,7). Oh! when the broken, dying, condemned soul, can but
see, by faith, the love of a tender-hearted Saviour, and also see
what he underwent to deliver it from under that death, guilt, and
hell, that now it feels and fears; which also it knoweth it hath
most justly and highly deserved; 'Then bless the Lord, O my soul'
(Psa 103:1,2,3); and 'What shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits?' (Psa 116:1-14).

Thus is faith a prevailing argument to the sinner, whereby he is
fetched off from what he was, and constrained to bend and yield to
what before he neither would nor could (1 Cor 2:14; Rom 8:7).

And hence it is, that gospel obedience is called 'the obedience of
faith,' as well as obedience to the faith (Rom 16:26). For it must
be by the faith of Christ in my heart, that I submit to the word
of faith in the Bible, otherwise all is to no profit: as saith the
apostle, 'The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed
with faith in them that heard it' (Heb 4:2). For faith alone can
see the reality of what the gospel saith; and so I say, argue over
the heart to the embracing of it.

Third, Faith is such a grace, as will represent to the soul
all things in their proper colours. It doth not, as doth unbelief
and ignorance, show us all things out of order; putting darkness
for light, and bitter for sweet; but will set every thing in its
proper place before our eyes; God and Christ shall be with it, the
chiefest good, the most lovely and amiable; a heavenly life shall
be of greater esteem, and more desirable, than all the treasures
of Egypt! Righteousness and sanctification will be the thing after
which it will most vehemently press; because it seeth not only
death and damnation as the fruits of sin, but sin also in itself,
distinct from the punishment belonging to it, a detestable, horrible,
and odious thing (Heb 11:25-27; Phil 3:7-12; Rom 12:9).

By faith we see that this world hath no abiding in it for us, nor
no satisfaction if it were otherwise (Prov 3:35; Heb 11:15,16;
13:14; 1 Cor 7:9-31). And hence it is, that the people of God have
groaned to be gone from hence, into a state that is both sinless and
temptationless. And hence it is again that they have run through
so many trials, afflictions, and adversities, even because of
that love to holiness of life that faith being in their hearts did
prompt them to, by showing them the worth and durableness of that
which was good, and the irksomeness and evil of all things else (2
Cor 5:1-8; Heb 11:33-39).

Fourth, Faith layeth hold of that which is able to help the soul
to bring forth good works: it layeth hold of, and engageth the
strength of Christ, and by that overcometh that which oppresseth;
'I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me' (Phil
4:13).

In a word, a life of holiness and godliness in this world, doth so
inseparably follow a principle of faith, that it is both monstrous
and ridiculous to suppose the contrary. What, shall not he that
hath life have motion! (Gal 2:20). He that hath by faith received
the spirit of holiness, shall not he be holy? (Gal 3:2). and he
that is called to glory and virtue, shall not he add to his faith
virtue? (2 Peter 1:4,5). We are by faith made good trees, and shall
not we bring forth good fruit? (Luke 6:43). They that believe are
created in Christ Jesus unto good works; and God hath, before the
world was, ordained that we should walk in them; and shall both our
second creation, and God's foreordination be made frustrate? (Eph
1:4; 2:10). Besides, the children of faith are the children of
light, and of the day (1 Thess 5:5). Lights upon a hill, and candles
on a candlestick, and shall not they shine? They are the salt of
the earth, shall not they be seasoning? (Matt 5:13-16).

The believer is the alone man, by whom God showeth to the world
the power of his grace, the operation of his people's faith, &c.
The unbelievers read indeed of the power of grace; of the faith,
hope, love, joy, peace, and sanctification of the heart of the
Christian; but they feel nothing of that sin-killing operation that
is in these things; these are to them as a story of Rome or Spain.
Wherefore to show them in others, what they find not in themselves,
God worketh faith, hope, love, &c., in a generation that shall
serve him; and by them they shall see what they cannot find in
themselves; and by this means they shall be convinced, that though
sin, and the pleasures of this life, be sweet to them, yet there
is a people otherwise minded; even such a people, that do indeed
see the glory of that which others read of, and from that sight
take pleasure in those things which they are most averse unto. To
this, I say, are Christians called; herein is God glorified; hereby
are sinners convinced; and by this the world condemned (1 Thess
4:7; 1 Peter 2:12; 3:1; Heb 11:7).

Object. But if faith doth so naturally cause good works, what
then is the reason that God's people find it so hard a matter to
be fruitful in good works?

Answer

1. God's people are fruitful in good works according to the proportion
of their faith; if they be slender in good works, it is because
they are weak in faith. Little faith is like small candles, or weak
fire, which though they shine and have heat; yet but dim shining
and small heat, when compared with bigger candles and greater fire.
The reason why Sardis had some in it whose works were not perfect
before God, it was, because they did not hold fast by faith the
word that they had formerly heard and received (Rev 3:1-3).

2. There may be a great mistake in our judging of our own fruitfulness.
The soul that indeed is candid and right at heart, is taught by
grace to judge itself, though fruitful, yet barren upon two accounts.
(1.) When it compareth its life to the mercy bestowed upon it: for
when a soul doth indeed consider the greatness and riches of the
mercy bestowed upon it, then it must needs cry out, 'O wretched
man that I am,' (Rom 7:24) for it seeth itself wonderfully to fall
short of a conversation becoming one who hath received so great a
benefit. (2.) It may also judge itself barren, because it falleth
so far short of that it would attain unto, 'it cannot do the thing
that it would' (Gal 5:17).

3. The heart of a Christian is naturally very barren; upon which,
though the seed of grace, that is the fruitfullest of all seeds,
be sown, yet the heart is naturally subject to bring forth weeds
(Mat 15:19). Now, to have a good crop from such ground, doth
argue the fruitfulness of the seed. Wherefore I conclude upon these
three things, (1.) That the seed of faith is a very fruitful seed,
in that it will be fruitful in so barren a soil. (2.) That faith
is not beholden to the heart, but the heart to it, for all its
fruitfulness. (3.) That therefore the way to be a more fruitful
Christian, it is to be stronger in believing.

SECOND

Now for the second thing, to wit, That every one that believeth
should be careful that their works be good. This followeth from
what went just before; to wit, That the heart of a Christian is a
heart subject to bring forth weeds.

There is flesh as well as spirit in the best of saints: and as the
spirit of grace will be always putting forth something that is good,
so the flesh will be putting forth continually that which is evil.
'For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh' (Gal 5:17).

Now this considered, is the cause why you find so often in the
Scriptures so many items and cautions to the Christians to look
to their lives and conversations. As, 'Keep thy heart with all
diligence' (Prov 4:23). 'Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit
you like men, be strong' (1 Cor 16:13). 'Be not deceived; God is
not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.
For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption;
but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting' (Gal 6:7,8).

All works are not good that seem to be so. It is one thing for a
man's ways to be right in his own eye, and another for them to be
right in God's. Often 'that which is highly esteemed among men is
abomination in the sight of God' (Prov 30:12; Luke 16:15).

Seeing corruption is not yet out of our natures, there is a proneness
in us to build [even] upon the right foundation, wood, hay, and
stubble, instead of gold and silver, and precious stones (1 Cor
3:11-15). How was both David the king, Nathan the prophet, and
Uzza the priest, deceived, touching good works! (1 Chron 17:1-4;
13:9-11). Peter also, in both his defending his Master in the
garden, and in dissuading of him from his sufferings, though both
out of love and affection to his Master, was deceived touching good
works. (Matt 16:22,23; John 18:10,11). Many have miscarried both
as to doctrine, worship, and the prosecution of each.

First, For doctrine. Christ tells the Jews, that they taught for
the doctrines of God the doctrines and traditions of men (Matt
15:9; Mark 7:7). As also, saith the apostle, They teach 'things
they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake' (Titus 1:11).

Second, Also touching worsphip, we find how frequently men
have mistaken, both for time, place, and matter, with which they
worshipped.

1. For time. It hath been that which man hath devised, not which
God hath commanded (1 Kings 12:32). They 'change the ordinance,'
saith Isaiah, 24:5. They change God's 'judgments into wickedness,'
saith Ezekiel 5:6.

2. For place. When they should have worshipped at Jerusalem, they
worshipped at Bethel, at Gilgal and Dan, in gardens, under poplars
and elms. (1 Kings 12:26-30; Hosea 4:13-15; Isa 65:2-5).

3. For the matter with which they worshipped. Instead of bringing
according to the commandment, they brought the lame, the torn, and
the sick; they would sanctify themselves in gardens, with swine's
flesh and mice, when they should have done it at Jerusalem, with
bullocks and lambs (Isa 66:17).

Third, Again, touching men's prosecuting their zeal for their worship,
&c., that they do think right; how hot hath it been, though with
no reason at all? Nebuchadnezzar will have his fiery furnace, and
Darius his lions' den for Nonconformists (Dan 3:6; 6:7, &c.) Again,
they have persecuted men even to strange cities; have laid traps
and snares in every corner, to entrap and to entangle their words;
and if they could at any time but kill the persons that dissented
from them, they would think they did God good service (Acts 26:11;
Luke 11:53,54; John 19:1,2). But what need we look so far from
home, were it not that I would seal my sayings with truth. We need
look no farther to affirm this position, than to the Papists and
their companions. How many have they in all ages hanged, burned,
starved, drowned, racked, dismembered, and murdered, both openly
and in secret? and all under a pretence of God, his worship, and
good works. 5 Thus you see how wise men and fools, saints and
sinners, Christians and heathens, have erred in the business of
good works; wherefore every one should be careful to see that their
works BE good.

Now, then, to prevent, if God will, miscarriage in this matter, I
shall propound unto you what it is for a work to be rightly good.
First, A good work must have the word for its authority. Second,
It must, as afore was said, flow from faith. Third, It must be both
rightly timed and rightly placed. Fourth, It must be done willingly,
cheerfully, &c.

First, It must have the word for its authority. Zeal without
knowledge is like a mettled horse without eyes, or like a sword in
a madman's hand; and there is no knowledge where there is not the
word: for if they reject the word of the Lord, and act not by that,
'what wisdom is in them?' saith the prophet (Jer 8:9; Isa 8:20).
Wherefore see thou have the word for what thou dost.

Second, As there must be the word for the authorising of what thou
dost, so there must be faith, from which it must flow, as I showed
you before: 'for whatsoever is not of faith is sin;' and 'without
faith it is impossible to please God.' Now, I say, without the
word there is no faith, (Rom 10:17), as without faith there is no
good, let men's pretences be what they will.

Third, As it must have these two aforenamed, so also it must have,
1. Right time; and, 2. Right place.

1. It must be rightly timed. Every work is not to be done at the
same time; every time not being convenient for such a work; There
is a time for all things, and every thing is beautiful in its time
(Eccl 3:11). There is a time to pray, a time to hear, a time to
read, a time to confer, a time to meditate, a time to do, and a
time to suffer. Now, to be hearing when we should be preaching and
doing, that is, yielding active obedience to that under which we
ought to suffer, is not good. Christ was very wary, that both his
doings and sufferings were rightly timed (John 2:3,4; 13:1,2). And
herein we ought to follow his steps. To be at plough in the field,
when I should be hearing the word, is not good; and to be talking
abroad, when I should be instructing my family at home, is as bad:
'Whoso keepeth the commandment, shall feel no evil thing: 'and
a wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment' (Eccl 8:5).
Good things mistimed, are fruitless, unprofitable, and vain.

2. As things must have their right time, so they must be rightly
placed; for the misplacing of any work is as bad as the mistiming
of it. When I say, things, if good, must be rightly placed, I mean,
we should not give to any work more than the word of God alloweth
it, neither should we give it less. Mint, anise, and cummin, are
not so weighty matters as faith and the love of God; as in (Matt
23:23). For a pastor to be exercising the office of a deacon,
instead of the office of a pastor, it is misplacing of works (Acts
6:2). For Martha to be making outward provision for Christ, when
she should have sat at his feet to hear his word, was the misplacing
a work; and for her sister to have done it at her requestthough
the thing in itself was goodhad been her sin also (Luke 10:39-42).
Now, to prevent the misplacing of good works,

(1.) They misplace them that set them in the room of Christ (Rom
10: 1-3).

(2.) They also misplace them that make them copartners with him (Rom
9:31,32; Acts 15:1). This is setting up our post by God's posts,
and man's righteousness by the righteousness of Christ (Eze 43:7,8).
These are said to be teachers of the law, not knowing what they
say, nor whereof they affirm (1 Tim 1:7).

(3.) They also misplace works, who ascribe to a work of less moment
that honour that belongeth to a work more noble. And such are (a)
Those who count the ceremonial part of an ordinance as good as
the doctrine and signification of it. 6 (b) Such who account the
dictates and impulses of a mere natural conscience, as good, as high,
and divine, as the leadings and movings of the Spirit of Christ.
(c) Those also who count it enough to do something of what God
hath commanded, and that something, possibly the least, instead
of all, and the things more necessary and weighty. (d) They also
much misplace them, who count things indifferent as high as those
that are absolutely necessary in the worship of God. (e) But
the grosser, who place men's traditions above them. (f) And they
greatest of all, who put bitter for sweet, and darkness for light.
All these things we must shun and avoid, as things absolutely
obstructive to good works.

Wherefore touching good works; obedience is better than sacrifice;
that is, to do things according to the word of God, is better
than to do them according to my fancy and conceit (1 Sam 15:22).
'Wherefore, let all things be done decently and in order' (1 Cor
14:40).

Fourth, Again, as good works should be ordered and qualified, as
before is touched, so they should be done from the heart, willingly,
cheerfully, with simplicity and charity, according to what a man
hath (1 John 5:3; 2 Cor 9:7; Rom 12:8; Col 3:12; 1 Cor 10:24; 2
Cor 8:12).

Farther, there are three things that a man should have in his eye
in every work he doth. 1. The honour of God (1 Cor 6:20). 2. The
edification of his neighbour (1 Cor 14:26). 3. The expediency or
inexpediency of what I am to do (1 Cor 6:12). And always observe
it, that the honour of God is wrapped up in the edification of thy
neighbour; and the edification of thy neighbour in the expediency
of what thou dost.

Again, if thou wouldst walk to the edification of thy neighbour,
and so to God's honour, in the midst of thy observers, beware,

1st. That thou in thy words and carriages dost so demean thyself,
that Christ in his precious benefits may be with clearness spoken
forth by thee; and take heed, that thou dost not enter into doubtful
points with them that are weak (Rom 15:1). But deal chiefly,
lovingly, and wisely, with their consciences about those matters
that tend to their establishment in the faith of their justification,
and deliverance from death and hell. 'Comfort the feeble-minded,'
confirm the weak (1 Thess 5:14).

2ndly. If thou be stronger than thy brother, take heed that thou do
not that before him, that may offend his weak conscience; I mean,
things that in themselves may be lawful. All that is lawful is not
expedient; all that is lawful edifieth not (1 Cor 6:12). Wherefore
here is thy wisdom and love, that thou in some things deny thyself
for thy brother's sake. 'I will eat no flesh while the world
standeth,' saith Paul, 'lest I make my brother to offend' (1 Cor
8:13). Wherefore have this faith to thyself before God (Rom 14:22).
But if thou walk otherwise, know, thou walkest not charitably, and
so not to edification, and so not to Christ's honour, but dost sin
against Christ, and wound thy weak brother, for whom Christ died
(Rom 14:15; 1 Cor 8:12). But I say, all this while keep thy eye
upon the word; take heed of going contrary to that under any pretence
whatever; for without the word, there is nothing to God's glory,
nor thy brother's edification. Wherefore, walk 'wisely in a perfect
way' (Psa 101:2, 3).

Having thus, in few words, showed you what are works rightly good,
I beseech you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you put
yourselves into a conscientious performance of them, that you may,
while you live here, be vessels of honour, and fit for the master's
use, and prepared to every good work (1 Tim 6:18). Study to approve
things that are excellent, 'that you may be sincere, and without
offence, until the day of Christ' (Phil 1:10). Covet communion with
God: 'covet earnestly the best gifts' (1 Cor 12:31). Ah! we that
are redeemed from among men (Rev 14:4), and that rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God (Rom 5:2), we that look, I say, for the
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our
Saviour Jesus Christ (Titus 2:13), 'what manner of persons ought
we to be in all holy conversation and godliness' (2 Peter 3:11).

To conclude, for your farther edification, take a plain rehearsal
of your several general duties and works, to which God engageth you
in his word, according to your places, callings, and relations in
this world;

DUTIES OF THE MASTER OF A FAMILY.

If thou have under thee a family, then thou art to consider the
several relations thou standest under; and art to know, that thou
in each of them hast a work to do for God, and that he expecteth
thy faithful deportment under every one of them. As, in general;

DUTY TO THE FAMILY IN GENERAL.

He that is the master of a family, he hath, as under that relation, a
work to do for God; to wit, the right governing of his own family.
And his work is twofold. First, Touching the spiritual state
thereof. Second, Touching the outward state thereof.

First, As touching the spiritual state of his family; he ought to
be very diligent and circumspect, doing his utmost endeavour both
to increase faith where it is begun, and to begin it where it is
not. Wherefore, to this end, he ought diligently and frequently to
lay before his household such things of God, out of his word, as
are suitable for each particular. And let no man question his rule
in the word of God for such a practice; for if the thing itself
were but of good report, and a thing tending to civil honesty, it
is within the compass and bounds even of nature itself, and ought
to be done; much more things of a higher nature; besides, the apostle
exhorts us to 'Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, pure, lovely, and of good report, to think of them,' that is,
to be mindful to do them (Phil 4:8). But to be conversant in this
godly exercise in our family, is very worthy of praise, and doth
much become all Christians. This is one of the things for which
God so highly commended his servant Abraham, and that with which
his heart was so much affected. I know Abraham, saith God, 'I
know him' to be a good man in very deed, for 'he will command his
children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way
of the Lord' (Gen 18:19). This was a thing also which good Joshua
designed should be his practice as long as he had a breathing time
in this world. 'As for me,' saith he, I 'and my household, we will
serve the Lord' (Josh 24:15).

Further, we find also in the New Testament, that they are looked
upon as Christians of an inferior rank that have not a due regard
to this duty; yea, so inferior as not fit to be chosen to any office
in the church of God. A [bishop or] pastor must be one that ruleth
well his own house, having his children in subjection with all
gravity; For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall
he take care of the church of God? 'The deacon' also, saith he,
must 'be the husband of one wife, ruling their children, and their
own house well' (1 Tim 3). Mark a little, the apostle seems to lay
down thus much, that a man that governs his family well, hath one
qualification belonging to a pastor or deacon in the house of God,
for he that knoweth not how to rule his own house, how shall he
take care of the church of God? which thing considered, it giveth
us light into the work of the master of a family, touching the
governing of his house.

1. A pastor must be sound and uncorrupt in his doctrine; and indeed
so must the master of a family (Titus 1:9; Eph 6:4).

2. A pastor should be apt to teach, to reprove, and to exhort; and
so should the master of a family (1 Tim 3:2; Deut 6:7).

3. A pastor must himself be exemplary in faith and holiness; and
so also should the master of a family (1 Tim 3:2-4; 4:12). 'I,'
saith David, 'will behave myself in a perfect way; I will walk in,'
or before, 'my house with a perfect heart' (Psa 101:2).

4. The pastor is for getting the church together; and when they
are so come together, then to pray among them, and to preach unto
them. This is also commendable in Christian masters of families.

Object.

But my family is ungodly and unruly, touching all that is good.
What shall I do?

Answer.

1. Though this be true, yet thou must rule them, and not they thee!
Thou are set over them of God, and thou art to use the authority
which God hath given thee, both to rebuke their vice, and to show
them the evil of their rebelling against the Lord. This did Eli,
though not enough; and thus did David (1 Sam 2:24, 25; 1 Chron
28:9). Also, thou must tell them how sad thy state was when thou
wast in their condition, and so labour to recover them out of the
snare of the devil (Mark 5:19).

2. Thou oughtest also to labour to draw them forth to God's public
worship, if peradventure God may convert their souls. Saith Jacob
to his household, and to all that were about him, 'Let us arise
and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar unto God, who
answered me in the day of my distress' (Gen 35:3). Hannah would
carry Samuel to Shiloh, that he might abide with God for ever
(1 Sam 1:22). Indeed a soul rightly touched, will labour to draw,
not only their families, but a whole city after Jesus Christ (John
4:28-30).

3. If they are obstinate, and will not go forth with thee, then do
thou get godly and sound men to thy house, and there let the word
of God be preached, when thou hast, as Cornelius, gathered thy
family and friends together (Acts 10). You know that the jailor,
Lydia, Crispus, Gaius, Stephanus, and others, had not only themselves,
but their families, made gracious by the word preached, and that
some of them, if not all, by the word preached in their houses
(Acts 16:14-34; 18:7, 8; 1 Cor 1:16). And this, for ought I know,
might be one reason among many, why the apostles taught in their
day, not only publicly, but from house to house; I say, that they
might, if possible, bring in those in some family, which yet remained
unconverted, and in their sins (Acts 10:24; 20:20, 21). For some,
you know how usual it was in the day of Christ, to invite him to
their houses, if they had any afflicted, that either would not or
could not come unto him (Luke 7:2, 3; 8:41). If this be the way
with those that have outward diseases in their families, how much
more then, where there are souls that have need of Christ, to save
them from death and eternal damnation!

4. Take heed that thou do not neglect family duties among them
thyself; as, reading the word and prayer; if thou hast one in thy
family that is gracious, take encouragement; nay, if thou art alone,
yet know that thou hast both liberty to go to God through Christ,
and also art at that time in a capacity of having the universal
church join with thee for the whole number of those that shall be
saved.

5. Take heed that thou suffer not any ungodly, profane, or heretical
books, or discourse in thy house. 'Evil communications corrupt good
manners' (1 Cor 15:33). I mean such profane or heretical books,
&c., as either tend to provoke to looseness of life, or such as do
oppose the fundamentals of the gospel. I know that Christians must
be allowed their liberty as to things indifferent; but for those
things that strike either at faith or holiness, they ought to
be abandoned by all Christians, and especially by the pastors of
churches, and masters of families; which practice was figured out
by Jacob's commanding his house, and all that was with him, to put
away the strange gods from among them, and to change their garments
(Gen 35:2). All those in the Acts set a good example for this, who
took their curious books and burned them before all men, though
they were worth fifty thousand pieces of silver (Acts 19:18, 19).
The neglect of this fourth particular hath occasioned ruin in many
families, both among children and servants. It is easier for vain
talkers, and their deceivable works, to subvert whole households,
than many are aware of (Titus 1:10, 11). Thus much touching the
spiritual state of thy household. And now to its outward.

Second, Touching the outward state of thy family, thou art to
consider these three things.

1. That it lieth upon thee to care for them that they have
a convenient livelihood. 'If any man provide not for his own, and
specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith,
and is worse than an infidel' (1 Tim 5:8). But mark, when the Word
saith, thou art to provide for thy house, it giveth thee no license
to distracting carefulness; neither doth it allow thee to strive
to grasp the world in thy heart, or coffers, nor to take care for
years or days to come, but so to provide for them, that they may
have food and raiment; and if either they or thou be not content
with that, you launch out beyond the rule of God (1 Tim 6:8; Matt
6:34). This is to labour, that you may have wherewith 'to maintain
good works for necessary uses' (Titus 3:14). And never object,
that unless you reach farther, it will never do; for that is but
unbelief. The word saith, 'That God feedeth ravens, careth for
sparrows, and clotheth the grass;' in which three, to feed, clothe,
and care for, is as much as heart can wish (Luke 12:6-28).

2. Therefore though thou shouldest provide for thy family; yet let
all thy labour be mixed with moderation; 'Let your moderation be
known unto all men' (Phil 4:5). Take heed of driving so hard after
this world, as to hinder thyself and family from those duties
towards God, which thou art by grace obliged to; as private prayer,
reading the scriptures, and Christian conference. It is a base thing
for men so to spend themselves and families after this world, as
that they disengage their heart to God's worship. Christians, 'The
time is short: it remaineth that both they that have wives be as
though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not;
and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that
use this world, as not abusing it; for the fashion of this world
passeth away' (1 Cor 7:29-31). Many Christians live and do in this
world, as if religion were but a by-business, and this world the
one thing necessary; when indeed all the things of this world are
but things by the by; and religion only the one thing needful (Luke
10:40-42).

3. If thou wouldst be such a master of a family as becomes thee,
thou must see that there be that Christian harmony among those under
thee, as becomes that house where one ruleth that feareth God.

(1.) Thou must look that thy children and servants be under subjection
to the word of God; for though it is of God only to rule the heart,
yet he expecteth that thou shouldest rule their outward man; which
if thou dost not, he may in a short time cut off all they stock,
[even every male] (1 Sam 3:11-14). See therefore that thou keep
them temperate in all things, in apparel, in language, that they
be not gluttons, nor drunkards; not suffering either thy children
vainly to domineer over thy servants, nor they again to carry
themselves foolishly towards each other.

(2.) Learn to distinguish between that injury that in thy family
is done to thee, and that which is done to God; and though thou
oughtest to be very zealous for the Lord, and to bear nothing that
is open transgression to him; yet here will be thy wisdom, to pass
by personal injuries, and to bury them in oblivion: 'Love covereth
a multitude of sins.' Be not then like those that will rage and
stare like madmen, when they are injured; and yet either laugh,
or at least not soberly rebuke, and warn, when God is dishonoured.
'Rule thy own house well, having thy childrenwith others in thy
familyin subjection, with all gravity' (1 Tim 3:4). Solomon was so
excellent sometimes this way, that he made the eyes of his beholders
to dazzle (2 Chron 9:3, 4). 7 But to break off from this general,
and to come to particulars.

[DUTY IN RELATION TO THE WIFE.]

Hast thou a wife? Thou must consider how thou oughtest to behave
thyself under that relation: and to do this aright, thou must
consider the condition of thy wife, whether she be one that indeed
believeth or not. First, If she believeth, then,

1. Thou art engaged to bless God for her: 'For her price is far
above rubies, and she is the gift of God unto thee, and is for
thy adorning and glory' (Prov 12:4; 31:10; 1 Cor 11:7). 'Favour is
deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the Lord,
she shall be praised' (Prov 31:30).

2. Thou oughtest to love her, under a double consideration: (1.)
As she is thy flesh and thy bone: 'For no man ever yet hated his
own flesh' (Eph 5:29). (2.) As she is together with thee an heir
of the grace of life (1 Peter 3:7). This, I say, should engage thee
to love her with Christian love; to love her, as believing you both
are dearly beloved of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and as those
that must be together with him in eternal happiness. 3. Thou
oughtest so to carry thyself to and before her, as doth Christ to
and before his church; as saith the apostle: So ought men to love
their wives, 'even as Christ loved the church, and gave himself
for it' (Eph 5:25). When husbands behave themselves like husbands
indeed, then will they be not only husbands, but such an ordinance
of God to the wife, as will preach to her the carriage of Christ
to his spouse. There is a sweet scent wrapped up in the relations
of husbands and wives, that believe (Eph 4:32); the wife, I say,
signifying the church, and the husband the head and saviour thereof,
'For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the
head of the church' (Eph 5:23). and he is the Saviour of the body.

This is one of God's chief ends in instituting marriage, that Christ
and his church, under a figure, might be wherever there is a couple
that believe through grace. Wherefore that husband that carrieth
it undiscreetly towards his wife, he doth not only behave himself
contrary to the rule, but also maketh his wife lose the benefit of
such an ordinance, and crosseth the mystery of his relation.

Therefore, I say, 'So ought men to love their wives as their own
bodies. He that loveth his wife, loveth himself. For no man ever
yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even
as the Lord the church:' (Eph 5: 8, 29). Christ laid out his life
for his church, covereth her infirmities, communicates to her his
wisdom, protecteth her, and helpeth her in her employments in this
world; and so ought men to do for their wives. Solomon and Pharaoh's
daughter had the art of thus doing, as you may see in the book
of Canticles. Wherefore bear with their weaknesses, help their
infirmities, and honour them as the weaker vessels, and as being
of a frailer constitution (1 Peter 3:7).

In a word, be such a husband to thy believing wife, that she may
say, God hath not only given me a husband, but such a husband as
preacheth to me every day the carriage of Christ to his church.

Second, If thy wife be unbelieving or carnal, then thou hast also
a duty lying before thee, which thou art engaged to perform under
a double engagement: 1. For that she lieth liable every moment to
eternal damnation. 2. That she is thy wife that is in this evil
case.

Oh! how little sense of the worth of souls is there in the heart
of some husbands; as is manifest by their unchristian carriage to
and before their wives! Now, to qualify thee for a carriage suitable,

1. Labour seriously after a sense of her miserable state, that thy
bowels may yearn towards her soul.

2. Beware that she take no occasion from any unseemly carriage of
thine, to proceed in evil. And here thou hast need to double thy
diligence, for she lieth in thy bosom, and therefore is capable of
espying the least miscarriage in thee.

3. If she behave herself unseemly and unruly, as she is subject to
do, being Christless and graceless, then labour thou to overcome
her evil with thy goodness, her forwardness with thy patience and
meekness. It is a shame for thee, who hast another principle, to
do as she.

4. Take fit opportunities to convince her. Observe her disposition,
and when she is most likely to bear, then speak to her very heart.

5. When thou speakest, speak to purpose. It is no matter for many
words, provided they be pertinent. Job in a few words answers his
wife, and takes her off from her foolish talking: 'Thou speakest,'
saith he, 'as one of the foolish women. What? shall we receive good
at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?' (Job 2:10).

6. Let all be done without rancour, or the least appearance
of anger: 'In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves,
ifperadventure they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil, who are taken captive by him at his will' (2 Tim 2:25, 26).
'And how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife' (1
Cor 7:16).

DUTY OF PARENTS TO CHILDREN If thou are a parent, a father, or a
mother, then thou art to consider thy calling under this relation.

Thy children have souls, and they must be begotten of God as well
as of thee, or they perish. And know also, that unless thou be very
circumspect in thy behavior to and before them, they may perish
through thee: the thoughts of which should provoke thee, both to
instruct, and also to correct them.

First, To instruct them as the scripture saith, and to 'bring
them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord'; and to do this
diligently, 'when thou sittest in thine housewhen thou liest down,
and when thou risest up' (Eph 6:4; Deu 6:7).

Now to do this to purpose:

1. Do it in terms and words easy to be understood: affect not high
expressions, they will drown your children. Thus God spake to his
children (Hosea 12:10), and Paul to his (1 Cor 3:2).

2. Take heed of filling their heads with whimsies, and unprofitable
notions, for this will sooner learn them to be malapert and proud,
than sober and humble. Open therefore to them the state of man
by nature; discourse with them of sin, of death, and hell; of a
crucified Saviour, and the promise of life through faith: 'Train
up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will
not depart from it' (Prov 22:6).

3. There must be much gentleness and patience in all thy instructions,
'lest they be discouraged' (Col. 3:21). And,

4. Labour to convince them by a conversation answerable, that the
things of which thou instructest them are not fables, but realities;
yea, and realities so far above what can be here enjoyed, that all
things, were they a thousand times better than they are, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory and worthiness of these things.8

Isaac was so holy before his children, that when Jacob remembered
God, he remembered that he was 'the Fear of his father Isaac' (Gen
31:53). Ah! when children can think of their parents, and bless
God for that instruction and good they have received from them,
this is not only profitable for children, but honourable, and
comfortable to parents: 'The father of the righteous shall greatly
rejoice: and he that begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him'
(Prov 23:24, 25). Second, The duty of correction.

1. See if fair words will win them from evil. This is God's way
with his children (Jer 25:4, 5).

2. Let those words you speak to them in your reproof, be both
sober, few, and pertinent, adding always some suitable sentence of
the scripture therewith; as, if they lie, then such as (Rev 21:8,
27). If they refuse to hear the word, such as (2 Chron 25:14-16).

3. Look to them, that they be not companions with those that are
rude and ungodly; showing with soberness a continual dislike of
their naughtiness; often crying out to them, as God did of old unto
his, 'Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate' (Jer 44:4).

4. Let all this be mixed with such love, pity, and compunction
of spirit, that if possible they may be convinced you dislike not
their persons, but their sins. This is God's way (Psa 99:8).

5. Be often endeavouring to fasten on their consciences the day
of their death, and judgment to come. Thus also God deals with his
(Deu 32:29).

6. If thou art driven to the rod, then strike advisedly in cool
blood, and soberly show them, (1.) their fault; (2.) how much it is
against thy heart thus to deal with them; (3.) and that what thou
dost, thou dost in conscience to God, and love to their souls; (4.)
and tell them, that if fair means would have done, none of this
severity should have been. This, I have proved it, will be a means
to afflict their hearts as well as their bodies; and it being the
way that God deals with his, it is the most likely to accomplish
its end.

7. Follow all this with prayer to God for them, and leave the issue
to him: 'Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod
of correction shall drive it far from him' (Prov 22:15).

Lastly, Observe these cautions,

1. Take heed that the misdeeds for which thou correctest thy children
be not learned them by thee. Many children learn that wickedness
of their parents for which they beat and chastise them.

2. Take heed thou smile not upon them, to encourage them in small
faults, lest that thy carriage to them be an encouragement to them
to commit greater.

3. Take heed thou use not unsavoury and unseemly words in thy
chastising of them, as railing, miscalling, and the like: this is
devilish.

4. Take heed thou do not use them to many chiding words and
threatenings, mixed with lightness and laughter; this will harden.
Speak not much, nor often, but pertinent to them with all gravity. 9

DUTIES OF MASTERS TO SERVANTS. Masters also have a work to do as
they stand related to their servants. And,

First, If possibly they can, to get them that fear God: 'He that
worketh deceit,' saith David, 'shall not dwell within my house; he
that telleth lies, shall not tarry in my sight' (Psa 101:7).

Second, But if none at the present but unbelievers can be got to
do thy labour, then,

1. Know that it is thy duty so to behave thyself to thy servant,
that thy service may not only be for thy good, but for the good of
thy servant, and that both in body and soul. Wherefore deal with
him, as to admonition, as with thy children; given him the same
bread of God thou givest to them; and who knows, but that if thou
with spiritual delicates bringest up thy servant, but he may become
thy spiritual son in the end (Prov 29:21).

2. Take heed thou do not turn thy servants into slaves, by overcharging
them in thy work, through thy greediness. To make men serve with
rigour, is more like to Israel's enemies than Christian masters
(Exo 1:14). 10

3. Take heed thou carry not thyself to thy servant as he of whom
it is said, 'He is such a man of Belial, that his servants could
not speak to him.' (1 Sam 25:14-17).

And the apostle bids you forbear to threaten them, because you also
have a Master in heaven (Eph 6:9). As who should say, Your servants
cannot be guilty of so many miscarriages against you, as you are
guilty of against Christ. Wherefore do with, and to your servants,
as you would have your master do with you.

4. Take heed that thou neither circumvent him at his coming in to
thy service, nor at his going out. Servants, at their going into
service, may be beguiled two ways.

(1.) By their masters lying unto them, saying, their work is so
small and so easy, when it is indeed, if not too burdensome, yet
far beyond what at first was said of it. This is beguiling of them.

(2.) The other way is, when masters greedily seek to wire-draw their
servants to such wages as indeed is too little and inconsiderable
for such work and labour. Both these the apostle opposeth, where
he saith, 'Masters give unto your servants that which is just,'
just labour, and just wages, 'knowing that ye also have a master
in heaven' (Col 4:1).

As servants may be circumvented at their coming into their labour,
so also they may be at their going out: which is done by masters
that either change their wages, like heathenish Laban, (Gen 31:7).
or by keeping it back, like those against whom God will be a swift
witness (Mal 3:5).

5. Take heed that thou make not a gain of thy place, because thou
art gracious, or livest conveniently for the means of grace. 11

Servants that are truly godly they care not how cheap they serve
their masters, provided they may get into godly families, or where
they may be convenient for the word. But now, if a master or mistress
should take this opportunity to make a prey of their servants, this
is abominable, this is making a gain of godliness, and merchandise
of the things of God, and of the soul of thy brother (1 Tim 6:5).

I have heard some poor servants say, That in some carnal families
they have had more liberty to God's things, and more fairness of
dealing, than among professors. But this stinketh. And as Jacob
said concerning the cruelty of his two sons, so may I say of such
masters, they make religion stink before the inhabitants of the
land (Gen 34:30).

In a word, learn of the Lord Jesus to carry yourselves well to
your servants, that your servants also may learn something of the
kindness of Christ by your deportment to them. Servants are goers
as well as comers; take heed that thou give them no occasion to
scandal the gospel when they are gone, for what they observed thee
unrighteously to do when they were with thee. Then masters carry
it rightly toward their servants, when they labour both in word
and life to convince them that the things of God are the one thing
necessary. That which servants are commanded to do, touching their
fear, their singleness of heart, their doing what they do as to
the Lord, and not to men; the master is commanded to do the same
things unto them. (Eph 6:6-9).

THE DUTY OF WIVES. But passing the master of the family, I shall
speak a word or two to those that are under him.

And, first, to the wife: The wife is bound by the law to her husband,
so long as her husband liveth (Rom 7:2). Wherefore she also hath
her work and place in the family, as well as the rest.

Now there are these things considerable in the carriage of a wife
toward her husband, which she ought conscientiously to observe.

First, That she look upon him as her head and lord. 'The head of
the woman is the man' (1 Cor 11:3). And so Sarah called Abraham
lord (1 Peter 3:6).

Second, She should therefore be subject to him, as is fit in the
Lord. The apostle saith, 'That the wife should submit herself to
her husband, as to the Lord' 12 (1 Peter 3:1; Col 3:18; Eph 5:22).
I told you before, that if the husband doth walk towards his wife
as becomes him, he will therein be such an ordinance of God to
her, besides the relation of a husband, that shall preach to her
the carriage of Christ to his church. And now I say also, that the
wife, if she walk with her husband as becomes her, she shall preach
the obedience of the church to her husband. 'Therefore as the church
is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands
in everything' (Eph 5:24). Now for thy performing of this work,
thou must first shun these evils.

1. The evil of a wandering and a gossiping spirit; this is evil
in the church, and is evil also in a wife, who is the figure of a
church. Christ loveth to have his spouse keep at home; that is, to
be with him in the faith and practice of his things, not ranging
and meddling with the things of Satan; no more should wives be given
to wander and gossip abroad. You know that Proverbs 7:11 saith,
'She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house.' Wives
should be about their own husbands' business at home; as the
apostle saith, Let them 'be discreet, chaste, keepers at home,
good, obedient to their own husbands.' And why? Because otherwise
'the word of God will be blasphemed' (Titus 2:5).

2. Take heed of an idle, talking, or brangling tongue. This also is
odious, either in maids or wives, to be like parrots, not bridling
their tongue; whereas the wife should know, as I said before,
that her husband is her lord, and is over her, as Christ is over
the church. Do you think it is seemly for the church to parrot it
against her husband? Is she not to be silent before him, and to
look to his laws, rather than her own fictions? Why so, saith the
apostle, ought the wife to carry it towards her husband? 'Let the
woman,' saith Paul, 'learn in silence with all subjection. But I
suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man,
but to be in silence' (1 Tim 2:11, 12). It is an unseemly thing
to see a woman so much as once in all her lifetime to offer to
overtop her husband; she ought in everything to be in subjection
to him, and to do all she doth, as having her warrant, licence, and
authority from him. And indeed here is her glory, even to be under
him, as the church is under Christ: Now 'she openeth her mouth with
wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of kindness' (Prov 31:26).

3. Take heed of affecting immodest apparel, or a wanton gait; this
will be evil both abroad and at home; abroad, it will not only give
ill example, but also tend to tempt to lust and lasciviousness;
and at home it will give an offence to a godly husband, and be
cankering to ungodly children, &c. Wherefore, as saith the apostle,
Let women's apparel be modest, as becometh women professing
godliness, with good works, 'not with broidered hair, or gold, or
pearls, or costly array' (1 Tim 2:9, 10). And as it is said again,
'Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting
the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel:
But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is
in the sight of God of great price. For after this manner in the old
time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves,
being in subjection unto their own husbands' (1 Peter 3:3-5).

But yet, do not think that by the subjection I have here mentioned,
that I do intend women should be their husbands' slaves. Women are
their husbands' yokefellows, their flesh and their bones; and he
is not a man that hateth his own flesh, or that is bitter against
it (Eph 5:29). Wherefore, let every man 'love his wife even
as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband' (Eph
5:33). The wife is master next her husband, and is to rule all in
his absence; 13 yea, in his presence she is to guide the house,
to bring up the children, provided she so do it, as the adversary
have no occasion to speak reproachfully (1 Tim 5:10, 13). 'Who can
find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies. A gracious
woman retaineth honour:' and guideth her affairs with discretion
(Prov 31:10; 11:16; 12:4).

Object.

But my husband is an unbeliever; what shall I do?

Answer.

If so, then what I have said before lieth upon thee with an engagement
so much the stronger. For, 1. Thy husband being in this condition,
he will be watchful to take thy slips and infirmities, to throw them
as dirt in the face of God and thy Saviour. 2. He will be apt to
make the worst of every one of thy words, carriages, and gestures.
3. And all this doth tend to the possessing his heart with more
hardness, prejudice, and opposition to his own salvation; wherefore,
as Peter saith, 'ye wives, be in subjection to your husbands;
that, if any obey not the word, they may also without the word be
won by the conversation of the wives; while they behold your chaste
conversation, coupled with fear' (1 Peter 3:1, 2). Thy husband's
salvation or damnation lieth much in thy deportment and behaviour
before him; wherefore, if there be in thee any fear of God, or
love to thy husband, seek, by a carriage full of meekness, modesty,
and holiness, and a humble behaviour before him, to win him to the
love of his own salvation; and by thus doing, how 'knowest thou,
O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband?' (1 Cor 7:16).

Object.

But my husband is not only an unbeliever, but one very froward,
peevish, and testy, yea, so froward, &c., that I know not how to
speak to him, or behave myself before him.

Answer.

Indeed there are some wives in great slavery by reason of their
ungodly husbands; and as such should be pitied, and prayed for;
so they should be so much the more watchful and circumspect in all
their ways.

1. Therefore be thou very faithful to him in all the things of this
life.

2. Bear with patience his unruly and unconverted behaviour; thou
art alive, he is dead; thou art principled with grace, he with
sin. Now, then, seeing grace is stronger than sin, and virtue than
vice; be not overcome with his vileness, but overcome that with thy
virtues (Rom 12:21). It is a shame for those that are gracious to
be as lavishing in their words, &c., as those that are graceless:
They that are 'slow to wrath are of great understanding; but they
that are hasty of spirit, exalteth folly' (Prov 14:29).

3. Thy wisdom, therefore, if at any time thou hast a desire to speak
to thy husband for his conviction, concerning anything, either good
or evil, it is to observe convenient times and seasons: There is
'a time to keep silence, and a time to speak' (Eccl 3:7). Now for
the right timing thy intentions,

(1.) Consider his disposition; and take him when he is farthest off
of those filthy passions that are thy afflictions. Abigail would
not speak a word to her churlish husband till his wine was gone
from him, and he in a sober temper (1 Sam 25:36, 37). The want of
this observation is the cause why so much is spoken, and so little
effected. 14

(2.) Take him at those times when he hath his heart taken with
thee, and when he showeth tokens of love and delight in thee. Thus
did Esther with the king her husband, and prevailed (Ester 5:3, 6;
7:1, 2).

(3.) Observe when convictions seize his conscience, and then follow
them with sound and grave sayings of the Scriptures. Somewhat like
to this dealt Manoah's wife with her husband (Judg 13:22, 23). Yet
then,

(a) Let thy words be few.

(b) And none of them savouring of a lording it over him; but speak
thou still as to thy head and lord, by way of entreaty and beseeching.

(c) And that in such a spirit of sympathy, and bowels of affection
after his good, that the manner of thy speech and behaviour in
speaking may be to him an argument that thou speakest in love, as
being sensible of his misery, and inflamed in thy soul with desire
after his conversion.

(d) And follow thy words and behaviour with prayers to God for his
soul.

(e) Still keeping thyself in a holy, chaste, and modest behaviour
before him.

Object.

But my husband is a sot, a fool, and one that hath not wit enough
to follow his outward employment in the world.

Answer.

1. Though all this be true, yet thou must know he is thy head, thy
lord, and thy husband.

2. Therefore thou must take heed of desiring to usurp authority over
him. He was not made for thee; that is, for thee to have dominion
over him, but to be thy husband, and to rule over thee (1 Tim 2:12;
1 Cor 11:3, 8).

3. Wherefore, though in truth thou mayest have more discretion than
he, yet thou oughtest to know that thou, with all that is thine,
is to be used as under thy husband; even 'every thing' (Eph 5:24).
Take heed therefore, that what thou dost goes not in thy name, but
his; not to thy exaltation, but his; carrying all things so, by thy
dexterity and prudence, that not one of thy husband's weaknesses
be discovered to others by thee: 'A virtuous woman is a crown to
her husband: but she that maketh ashamed, is as rottenness in his
bones.' For then, as the wise man sayeth, 'she will do him good
and not evil, all the days of her life' (Prov 12:4; 31:12).

4. Therefore act, and do still, as being under the power and
authority of thy husband.

Now touching thy carriage to thy children and servants. Thou art
a parent, and a mistress, and so thou oughtest to demean thyself.
And besides, seeing the believing woman is a figure of the church,
she ought, as the church, to nourish and instruct her children,
and servants, as the church, that she may answer in that particular
also; and truly, the wife being always at home, she hath great
advantage that way; wherefore do it, and the Lord prosper your
proceeding.

DUTIES OF CHILDREN TO PARENTS.

There lieth also a duty upon children to their parents, which
they are bound both by the law of God and nature conscientiously
to observe: 'Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is
right.' And again, 'Children, obey your parents in all things; for
this is well pleasing unto the Lord' (Eph 6:1; Col 3:20).

There are these general things in which children should show forth
that honour that is due to their parents from them.

First, They should always count them better than themselves. I
observe a vile spirit among some children, and that is, they are
apt to look over their parents, and to have slighting and scornful
thoughts of them. This is worse than heathenish; such an one hath
got just the heart of a dog or a beast, that will bite those that
begot them, and her that brought them forth.

Object.

But my father, &c., is now poor, and I am rich, and it will be a
disparagement, or at least a hinderance to me, to show that respect
to him as otherwise I might.

Answer.

I tell thee thou arguest like an atheist and a beast, and standest
in this full flat against the Son of God (Mark 7:9-13). Must a
gift, and a little of the glory of the butterfly, make thee that
thou shalt not do for, and honour to, thy father and mother? 'A wise
son maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his mother'
(Prov 15:20). Though thy parents be never so low, and thou thyself
never so high, yet he is thy father, and she thy mother, and they
must be in thy eye in great esteem: 'The eye that mocketh at his
father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley
shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it' (Prov 30:17).

Second, Thou oughtest to show thy honour to thy parents, by a
willingness to help them with such necessaries and accommodations
which they need. 'If anyhave children or nephews, let them learn to
show piety 15 at home, and to requite their parents:' saith Paul,
'for that is good and acceptable before God' (1 Tim 5:4). And this
rule Joseph observed to his poor father, though he himself was next
the king in Egypt (Gen 47:12; 41:39-44).

But mark, let them 'requite their parents.' There are three things
for which, as long as thou livest, thou wilt be a debtor to thy
parents.

1. For thy being in this world. They are they from whom, immediately
under God, thou didst receive it.

2. For their care to preserve thee when thou wast helpless, and
couldst neither care for, nor regard thyself.

3. For the pains they have taken with thee to bring thee up. Until
thou hast children of thy own, thou wilt not be sensible of the
pains, watchings, fears, sorrow, and affliction, that they have
gone under to bring thee up; and when thou knowest it, thou wilt
not easily yield that thou has recompensed them for thy favour to
thee. How often have they sustained [thee in] thy hunger, clothed
thy nakedness? What care have they taken that thou mightest have
wherewith to live and do well when they were dead and gone? They
possibly have spared it from their own belly and back for thee, and
have also impoverished themselves, that thou mightest live like a
man. 16 All these things ought duly, and like a man, to be considered
by thee; and care ought to be taken on thy part to requite them.
The Scripture saith so, reason saith so, and there be none but dogs
and beasts that deny it. It is the duty of parents to lay up for
their children; and the duty of children to requite their parents.

Third, Therefore show, by all humble and son-like carriage, that
thou dost to this day, with thy heart, remember the love of thy
parents. Thus much for obedience to parents in general.

Again, if thy parents be godly, and thou wicked, as thou art, if
thou hast not a second work or birth from God upon thee, then thou
art to consider, that thou art more strongly engaged to respect and
honour thy parents, not now only as a father in the flesh, but as
godly parents; thy father and mother are now made of God thy teachers
and instructors in the way of righteousness. Wherefore, to allude
to that of Solomon, 'My son, keep thy father's commandment, and
forsake not the law of thy mother; bind them continually upon thine
heart, and tie them about thy neck' (Prov 6:20, 21).

Now, to provoke thee hereto, consider,

1. That this hath been the practice always of those that are and
have been obedient children; yea, of Christ himself to Joseph and
Mary, though he himself was God blessed for ever (Luke 2:51).

2. Thou hast also the severe judgments of God upon those that have
been disobedient, to awe thee. As, (1.) Ishmael, for but mocking
at one good carriage of his father and mother, was both thrust out
of his father's inheritance and the kingdom of heaven, and that
with God's approbation (Gen 21:9-14; Gal 4:30). (2.) Hophni and
Phinehas, for refusing the good counsel of their father, provoked
the great God to be their enemy: 'They hearkened not unto the voice
of their father, because the Lord would slay them' (1 Sam 2:23-25).
(3.) Absalom was hanged, as I may say, by God himself, for rebelling
against his father (2 Sam 18:9).

Besides, little dost thou know how heart-aching a consideration it
is to thy parents, when they do but suppose thou mayest be damned!
How many prayers, sighs, and tears, are there wrung from their
hearts upon this account? Every miscarriage of thine goeth to their
heart, for fear God should take an occasion thereat to shut thee
up in hardness for ever. How did Abraham groan for Ishmael? 'O,'
saith he, to God, 'that Ishmael might live before thee!' (Gen
17:18). How was Isaac and Rebecca grieved for the miscarriage of
Esau? (Gen 26:34, 35). And how bitterly did David mourn for his
son, who died in his wickedness? (2 Sam 18:32, 33).

Lastly, And can any imagine, but that all these carriages of thy
godly parents, will be to thee the increase of thy torments in
hell, if thou die in thy sins notwithstanding?

Again, if thy parents, and thou also, be godly, how happy a thing
is this? How shouldest thou rejoice, that the same faith should
dwell both in thy parents and thee? Thy conversion, possibly, is
the fruits of thy parents' groans and prayers for thy soul; and
they cannot choose but rejoice; do thou rejoice with them. It is
true, in the salvation of a natural son, which is mentioned in the
parable: 'This my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and
is found. And they began to be merry' (Luke 15:24). Let therefore
the consideration of this, that thy parents have grace, as well as
thee, engage thy heart so much the more to honour, reverence, and
obey them.

Thou art better able now to consider the pains and care that thy
friends have been at, both for thy body and soul; wherefore strive
to requite them. Thou hast strength to answer in some measure the
command: wherefore do not neglect it. It is a double sin in a gracious
son not to remember the commandment, yea, the first commandment
with promise (Eph 6:1, 2). Take heed of giving thy sweet parents
one snappish word, or one unseemly carriage. Love them because they
are thy parents, because they are godly, and because thou must be
in glory with them.

Again, if thou be godly, and thy parents wicked, as often it sadly
falls out; then,

1. Let thy bowels yearn towards them; it is thy parents that are
going to hell!

2. As I said before to the wife, touching her unbelieving husband,
so now I say to thee, Take heed of a parroting tongue: speak to
them wisely, meekly, and humbly; do for them faithfully without
repining; and bear, with all child-like modesty, their reproaches,
their railing, and evil speaking. Watch fit opportunities to lay
their condition before them. O! how happy a thing would it be,
if God should use a child to beget his father to the faith! Then
indeed might the father say, With the fruit of my own bowels hath
God converted my soul. The Lord, if it be his will, convert our
poor parents, that they, with us, may be the children of God. 17

CONCERNING SERVANTS.

Servants also, they have a work to do for God, in their place and
station among men.

The apostles assert masters under a threefold consideration. First,
The believing master. Second, The unbelieving master. Third, The
froward master.

For all which, servants are furnished with counsel and advice in
the word, for the demeaning of themselves, under each of them.

But before I speak in particular to any of these, I will in general
show you the duty of servants.

1. Thou art to look upon thyself as thou art; that is, as a servant,
not a child, nor a wife; thou art inferior to these; wherefore
count thyself under them, and be content with that station. 'For
three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it cannot
bear.' One is 'a servant when he reigneth' (Prov 30:21, 22). It is
out of thy place, either to talk or do, as one that reigneth.

2. Consider, that thou being a servant, what is under thy hand is
not thy own but thy master's. Now, because it is not thy own thou
oughtest not to dispose of it; but because it is thy master's,
thou oughtest to be faithful. Thus it was with Joseph (Gen 39:8,
9). But if thou do otherwise, know that thou shalt receive of God
for the wrong that thou dost; and there is with God 'no respect of
persons' (Col 3:25). Wherefore,

3. Touching thy work and employment, thou art to do it as unto the
Lord, and not for man; and, indeed, then servants do their business
as becomes them, when they do all in obedience to the Lord, as knowing
that the place in which they now are, it is the place where Christ
hath put them, and in which he expecteth they should be faithful.
'Servants,' saith Paul, 'be obedient to them that are your
master's,--with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart
as unto Christ; not with eye-service, as men-pleasers; but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart' (Eph 6:5,
6).

Observe a little the word of God to servants. 1. Servants must
be obedient; yet, 2. Not with that obedience that will serve man
only. Servants must have their eye on the Lord, in the work they do
for their masters. 3. That their work in this service is the will
and ordinance of God. From which I conclude, that thy work in
thy place and station, as thou art a servant, is as really God's
ordinance, and as acceptable to him, in its kind, as is preaching,
or any other work, for God; and that thou art as sure to receive a
reward for thy labour, as he that hangs or is burnt for the gospel.

Wherefore, saith the apostle to servants, 'Whatsoever ye do, do
it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men, knowing that of the
Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance; for ye serve
the Lord Christ' (Col 3:23, 24). And now touching the three sorts
of masters mentioned before.

First, For the believing master; saith Paul, 'They that have believing
masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren; but
rather do them service, because they are faithful and beloved, and
partakers, with the servants, 'of the' heavenly 'benefit' (1 Tim
6:2). Servants, if they have not a care of their hearts, will be
so much in the consideration of the relation that is betwixt their
masters and they, as brethren, that they will forget the relation
that is between them as masters and servants. Now, though they
ought to remember the one, yet let them take heed of forgetting
the other. Know thy place, as a servant, while thou considerest that
thy master and thee are brethren, and do thy work for him faithfully,
humbly, and with meekness, because he is a master faithful and
beloved, and partaker of the heavenly benefit. 'If any man teach
otherwise,' saith the apostle Paul, 'and consent not to wholesome
words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine
which is according to godliness; he is proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about questions, and strifes of words; whereof cometh envy,
strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness: from such withdraw thyself' (1 Tim 6:3-5).

Second, For the unbelieving masters, for of them Paul speaks in the
first verse of the 6th of Timothy, 'Let as many servants,' saith
he, 'as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all
honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed.'
Servants living with unbelieving masters, are greatly engaged to
be both watchful, faithful, and trusty. Engaged, I say, 1. From
the consideration of the condition of their master; for he being
unbelieving, will have an evil eye upon thee, and upon thy doings,
and so much the more because thou professest. As in the case of
Saul and David (1 Sam 18:8, 9 &c). 2. Thou art engaged because of
the profession thou makest of the word of God; for by thy profession
thou dost lay both God and his word before thy master, and he
hath no other wit but to blaspheme them, if thou behave thyself
unworthily. Wherefore Paul bids Titus 'exhort servants to be obedient
to their own masters, and to please them well in all things, not
answering again;' not giving parroting answers, or such as are cross
or provoking, not purloining, but showing all good fidelity, that
they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things'
(Titus 2:9, 10). That servant, who in an unbeliever's family doth
his work before God, as God's ordinance, he shall adorn the doctrine
of God, if not save his master by so doing; but if he doth otherwise,
he shall both stumble the unbeliever, dishonour God, offend the
faithful, and bring guilt upon his own soul.

Third, For the froward master, though I distinguish him from the
unbeliever, yet it is not because he may not be such, but because
every unbeliever doth not properly go under that name. Now with
this froward and peevish fellow, thou art to serve as faithfully
for the time thou standest bound, as with the most pleasant and
rational master in the world: 'Servants,' saith Peter, 'be subject
to your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward' (1 Peter 2:18). And if thy peevish master will
still be froward, either out of spite to thy religion, or because
he is without reason concerning thy labour thou to the utmost of
thy power labouring faithfully God then reckoneth thee a sufferer
for well-doing, as truly as if thou wert called upon the stage
of this world before men, for the matters of thy faith. Wherefore
Peter adds this encouragement to servants, to the exhortation he
gave them before: 'This is thank worthy,' saith he, 'if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what
glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take
it patiently? But if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take
it patiently, this is acceptable with God' (1 Peter 2:19, 20).
Wherefore be comforted concerning thy condition, with considering
that God looks upon thee, as on Jacob in the family of Laban; and
will right all thy wrongs, and recompense thee for thy faithful,
wise, and godly behaviour, before, and in the service of thy froward
master. Wherefore, be patient, I say, and abound in faithfulness
in thy place and calling, till God make a way for thy escape from
this place; and when thou mayest be made free, use it rather (1
Cor 7:21).

DUTIES OF NEIGHBOURS EACH TO OTHER.

Having thus in few words showed you what is duty under your several
relations, I shall now at last speak, in a word or two, touching
good neighbourhood, and then draw towards a conclusion. Touching
neighbourhood, there are these things to be considered and practised,
if thou wilt be found in the practical part of good neighbourhood.

First, Thou must be of a good and sound conversation in thy own
family, place, and station, showing to all, the power that the
gospel and the things of another world hath in thy heart, 'That ye
may be blameless, and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke,
in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine
as lights in the world' (Phil 2:15, 16).

Second, As persons must be of good behavior at home, that will be
good neighbours, so they must be full of courtesy and charity to them
that have need about them (Luke 10:36, 37). Right good neighbourhood
is for men readily to communicate, as of their spirituals, so of
their temporalities, as food, raiment, and help to those that have
need; to be giving to the poor as thou seest them go by thee, or
to inquire after their condition, and according to thy capacity to
send unto them (Job 31:15-17, &c).

Third, Thou must be always humble and meek among them, as also grave
and gracious; not light and frothy, but by thy words and carriage
ministering 'grace to the hearers' (Eph 4:29). Thus also Job honoured
God among his neighbours (Job 29:6-12).

Fourth, Thy wisdom will be, rightly to discountenance sin, and to
reprove thy neighbour for the same (Lev 19:17), denying thyself in
some things, for the preventing an injury to thy neighbour, that
thou mayest please him for his edification (Rom 15:2).

Fifth, If thou wouldest be a good neighbour, take heed of thy tongue
upon two accounts.

1. That thou with it give no offensive language to thy neighbour,
to the provoking of him to anger. Bear much, put up wrongs, and
say little: 'It is an honour for a man to cease from strife: but
every fool will be meddling' (Prov 20: 3). And again, 'He loveth
transgression that loveth strife' (Prov 17:19).

2. And as thou shouldest take heed that thou be not the original
of contention and anger, so also take heed that thou be not
an instrument to beget it between parties, by tale-bearing and
a gossiping spirit: 'He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife
belonging not to him, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears. As
coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a contentious
man to kindle strife' (Prov 26:17-21). I do observe two things very
odious in many professors; the one is a head-strong and stiff-necked
spirit, that will have its own way; and the other is, a great deal
of tattling and talk about religion, and but a very little, if
anything, of those Christian deeds that carry in them the cross of
a Christian in the doing thereof, and profit to my neighbour.

(1.) When I say a head-strong and stiff-necked spirit, I mean,
they are for pleasing themselves and their own fancies, in things
of no weight, though their so doing be as the very slaughter-knife
to the weak conscience of a brother or neighbour. Now this is
base. A Christian, in all such things as intrench not the matters
of faith and worship, should be full of self-denial, and seek to
please others rather than themselves; 'Give none offence--to the
Jews, nor to the 18 Greeks, nor to the church of God:--not seeking
mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved'
(1 Cor 10:32, 33).

(2.) And the second is as bad, to wit, when professors are great
prattlers and talkers, and disputers, but do little of anything
that bespeaketh love to the poor, or self-denial in outward things.
Some people think religion is made up of words; a very wide mistake!
Words without deeds is but a half-faced religion: 'Pure religion,
and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world' (James 1:27). Again, 'If a brother or
sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say
unto them, Depart in peace, be warmed and filled,' which are very
fine words, yet if you 'give them not those things that are needful
to the body, what doth it profit?' (James 2:15, 16).

[Sins which interfere with the duties of Christian Brotherhood and
Civil Neighbourhood.]

Now then, before I go any farther, I will here take an occasion to
touch a little upon those sins that are so rife in many professors
in this day: and they are, covetousness, pride, and uncleanness.
I would speak a word to them in this place, the rather because
they are they which spoil both Christian brotherhood, and civil
neighbourhood, in too great a measure.

OF COVETOUSNESS.

First, For Covetousness.

1. Covetousness; it is all one with desire; he that desires, covets,
whether the thing he desires be evil or good. Wherefore that which
is called coveting, in Exodus 20:17, is called desire, in Deuteronomy
5:21. As the apostle also saith, 'I had not known lust, except the
law had said, Thou shalt not covet' (Rom 7:7). That is, I had not
known lust to be a sin, unless the law had forbid it. Wherefore,
though lawful desires are good (1 Cor 12:31), and to be commended,
yet covetousness, as commonly understood, is to be fled from, and
abhorred, as of the devil.

2. Covetousness, or evil desire, it is the first mover, and giveth
to every sin its call, as I may say, both to move and act; as was
said before, the apostle had not known sin, except the law had
said, Thou shalt not desire or covet; for where there is no desire
to sin, there appears no sin.

3. Therefore covetousness carrieth in it every sinwe speak of sins
against the second tableeven as a serpent carrieth her young ones
in her belly. This the scripture affirms, where it saith, 'Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his
maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy
neighbour's' (Exo 20:17). Covetousness will meddle with anything.

Now, there are in my mind at present these eight notes of
covetousness, which hinder good works, and a Christian coversation
among men, wherever they are harboured.

(1.) When men, to whom God hath given a comfortable livelihood,
are yet not content therewith. This is against the apostle, where
he saith, 'Let your conversation be without covetousness; and be
content with such things as ye have: for he hath said, I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee' (Heb 13:5).

(2.) It is covetousness in the seller, that puts him to say of his
traffic, it is better than it is, that he may heighten the price of
it; and covetousness in the buyer, that prompts him to say worse
of a thing than he thinks in his conscience it is, and that for
an abatement of a reasonable price. This is that which the apostle
forbids under the name of defraud, 1 Corinthians 6:8, and that
which Solomon condemns (Prov 20:14).

(3.) It is through covetousness that men think much of that which
goeth beside their own mouth, though possibly it goeth to those
that have more need than themselves, and also that better deserve
it than they.

(4.) It argueth covetousness, when men will deprive themselves,
and those under them, of the privileges of the gospel, for more of
this world; and is condemned by Christ (Luke 14:18-20).

(5.) It argueth covetousness, when men that have it, can go by,
or hear of the poor, and shut up their bowels and compassions from
them (1 John 3:17).

(6.) Also when men are convinced it is their duty to communicate to
such and such that have need, yet they defer it, and if not quite
forget it, yet linger away the time, as being loth to distribute
to the necessities of those in want. This is forbidden by the Holy
Ghost: 'Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is
in the power of thine hand to do it.' Now, it is due from thee to
the poor, by the commandment of God, if they want, and thou hast
it; 'Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and tomorrow
I will give; when thou hast it by thee' (Prov 3:27, 28).

(7.) It argueth a greedy mind also, when, after men have cast in
their minds what to give, they then from that will be pinching and
clipping, and taking away; whereas the Holy Ghost saith, 'Every
man according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give, not
grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver' (2
Cor 9:7).

(8.) And lastly, It argueth a filthy greedy heart also, when a
man, after he hath done any good, then in his heart to repent, and
secretly wish that he had not so done, or at least, that he had
not done so much: this is to be weary of well-doing; (I speak now
of communicating,) and carrieth in it two evils, First, It spoileth
the work done. And, secondly, It, if entertained, spoileth the heart
for doing any more so. 'The vile person shall be no more called
liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful,' for 'the liberal
deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things shall he stand'
(Isa 32:5, 8). Now then, to dissuade all from this poisonous sin,
observe, that above all sins in the New Testament, this is called
idolatry (Eph 5:5; Col 3:5). And therefore God's people should be
so far from being taken with it, that they should be much afraid of
the naming of it one among another, lest it should, as adulterous
thoughts, infect the heart, by the talking of it (Eph 5:3).

Quest.

But why is covetousness called idolatry?

Answer.

1. Because it engageth the very heart of man in it, to mind earthly
things; it gets our love, which should be set on God; and sets it
upon poor empty creatures; it puts our affections out of heaven,
where they should be, and sets them on earth, where they should
not be (Eze 33:31; Phil 3:18, 19; Col 3:1-3). Thus it changeth the
object on which the heart should be set, and setteth it on that on
which it should not. It makes a man forsake God, 'the fountain of
living waters,' and causeth him to hew to himself 'cisterns, broken
cisterns, that can hold no water' (Jer 2:11-13). For,

2. It rejecteth the care, government, and providence of God towards
us, and causeth us to make of our care and industry a god, to whom,
instead of God, we fly continually, both for the keeping what we
have and for getting more. This was Israel's idolatry of old, and
the original of all her idolatrous practices. 'For their mother
hath played the harlot,' that is, committed idolatry: 'she that
conceived them hath done shamefully: for she said, I will go after
my lovers, that gave me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax,
mine oil and my drink' (Hosea 2:5).

3. It disalloweth of God's way of disposing his creatures, and
would have them ordered and disposed of otherwise than his heavenly
wisdom seemeth meet; and hence ariseth all discontents about God's
dealing with us. Covetousness never yet said, It is the Lord, let
him do what he pleaseth; but is ever objecting, like a god, against
everything that goeth against it; and it is that which, like
a god, draweth away the heart and soul from the true God, and his
Son Jesus Christ: 'And he went away sorrowful; for he had great
possessions' (Matt 19:16-22). Now then, that which engageth the
heart, that rejecteth the providence of God, and that is for ordering
and disposing of things contrary to God, and for breaking with God
upon these terms, is idolatry; and all these do covetousness. 'The
wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and blesseth the covetous,
whom the Lord abhorreth' (Psa 10:3). Now the way to remedy this
disease is, to learn the lesson which Paul had got by heart; to
wit, 'In whatsoever state you are, therewith to be content' (Phil
4:11).

OF PRIDE.

Second, I come, in the second place, to speak a word of pride, and
loftiness of heart and life.

1. Pride, in general, it is that which causeth a man to think of
man and his things, above what is written (1 Cor 4:6).

2. It hath its seat in the heart among these enormities, fornications,
adulteries, lasciviousness, murders, deceit, &c. (Mark 7:21-23)
and showeth itself in these following particulars.

(1.) When you slight this or that person, though gracious; that
is, look over them, and shun them for their poverty in this world,
and choose rather to have converse with others, that possibly
are less gracious, because of their greatness in this world. This
the apostle James writes against, James 2:1-3, under the name of
partiality; 'for indeed the fruits of a puffed-up heart is to deal
in this manner with Christians' (1 Cor 4:6, 7). Now this branch of
pride floweth from ignorance of the vanity of the creature, and of
the worth of a gracious heart; wherefore get more of the knowledge
of these two, and this sprig will be nipped in the head, and you
will learn to condescend to men of low degree (Rom 12:16).

(2.) It argues pride of heart, when men will not deny themselves in
things that they may, for the good and profit of their neighbours.
And it argueth now, that pride has got so much up into self-love
and self-pleasing, that they little care who they grieve or offend,
so they may have their way (Oba 12-15).

(3.) It argueth pride of heart, when sober reproofs for sin, and
unbeseeming carriages, will not down with thee, but that rather
thou snuffest, and givest way to thy spirit to be peevish, and to
retain prejudice against those that thus reprove thee. Saith the
prophet, 'Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the Lord hath
spoken.' That is, hear the reproofs of God for your sins, and break
them off by repentance; 'but if ye will not hear it, my soul shall
weep in secret for your pride,' &c. (Jer 13:15-17). So also in
Hosea, 'They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God:
for the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have
not know the Lord. And the pride of Israel doth testify to his face'
&c. (Hosea 5:4, 5). This argueth great senselessness of God, and
a heart greatly out of frame.

(4.) It argueth pride also, when a reproof or admonition will not
down as well from the poorest saint, as from the greatest doctor;
and it argueth a glory in men, 1 Corinthians 3:21, and that they
would, that their faith should stand in their wisdom, and not 'in
the power of God;' that is, of naked truth 1 Corinthians 2:5.

(5.) It argueth pride of heart, when a man that hath this or that
in his heart to do, in reference to God, but yet will slight a sober
asking counsel and direction of God in this matter: 'The wicked,
through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God,'
saith David (Psa 10:4).

(6.) It argueth pride of heart, when persons are tickled with
thoughts of their own praise, that secretly lust after it; that
think of themselves and others above what is written; which those
do who do not acknowledge that man in his best estate is altogether
vanity: but such kind of people have forgot the exhortation, 'Be
not high-minded, but fear:' (Rom 11:20). And also, That there is
a knowledge that puffeth up, and edifieth neither themselves nor
others (1 Cor 8:1, 2). Wherefore, to such the apostle saith, Be
'not desirous of vain-glory,' but in lowliness of mind 'let each
esteem others better than themselves' (Phil 2:3; Gal 5:26).

Pride also there is in outward carriage, behaviour, and gesture,
which is odious for Christians to be tainted with; and this pride
is discovered by mincing words, a made carriage, and an affecting
the toys and baubles that Satan, and every lightheaded fool bringeth
into the world. As God speaketh of the daughters of Zion, 'they
walk with stretched forth necks, and wanton eyes, mincing as they
go, and making a tinkling with their feet' (Isa 3:16). A very
unhandsome carriage for a people that profess godliness, and that
use to come before God to confess their sins, and to bemoan themselves
for what they have done. How can a sense of thy own baseness, of
the vileness of thy heart, and of the holiness of God, stand with
such a carriage? Dost thou see the vileness of thy heart, the
fruit of sin? And art thou afflicted with that disagreement that
is between God and thy heart, that layest the reins on the neck of
thy lusts, and lettest them run whither they will? Be not deceived,
pride ariseth from ignorance of these things (1 Tim 6:3, 4). A sense
of my vileness, of what I have deserved, and of what continually
in my heart opposeth God, cannot stand with a foolish, light, and
wanton carriage: thou wilt then see there is other things to mind
than to imitate the butterfly. Alas, all these kind of things are
but a painting the devil, and a setting a carnal gloss upon a castle
of his; thou art but making gay the spider: is thy heart ever the
sounder for thy fine gait, they mincing words, and thy lofty looks?
Nay, doth not this argue, that thy heart is a rotten, cankered,
and besotted heart? Oh! that God would but let thee see a little
of thy own inside, as thou hast others to behold thy outside: thou
painted sepulchre, thou whited wall, will these things be found
virtues in the day of God? Or, is this the way that thou takest to
mortify sin? 'An high look, and a proud heart, the plowing of the
wicked, is sin' (Prov 21:4). Pride is the ringleader of the seven
abominations that the wise man nameth, Proverbs 6:16, 17, and is
that above all that causeth to fall into the condemnation of the
devil (1 Tim 3:6).

OF ADULTERY OR UNCLEANNESS.

Now I come in the last place to touch a word or two of adultery,
and then to draw towards a conclusion. Adultery, it hath its place
in the heart, among the rest of those filthinesses I mentioned
before (Mark 7:21, 22) of which sin I observe two things.

1. That almost in every place where the apostle layeth down a
catalogue of wickednesses, he layeth down adultery, fornication,
and uncleanness in the front; as that in Mark 7:21, Romans 1:29,
1 Corinthians 6: 9, Galatians 5:19, Ephesians 5:3, 1 Thessalonians
4:3-5, Hebrews 12:16, James 2:11, 1 Peter 2:11, and 2 Peter 2:10.
From this I gather that the sin of uncleanness is a very predominant
and master sin, easy to overtake the sinner, as being one of the
first that is ready to offer itself on all occasions to break the
law of God.

2. I observe that this sin is committed unawares to many, even so
soon as a man hath but looked upon a woman: 'I say unto you,' saith
Christ, 'that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust,' or desire,
'after her, he hath committed adultery with her already in his heart'
(Matt 5:28). This sin of uncleanness, I say, is a very taking sin;
it is natural above all sins to mankind; as it is most natural,
so it wants not tempting occasions, having objects for to look on
in every corner: wherefore there is need of a double and treble
watchfulness in the soul against it. It is better here to make a
covenant with our eyes, like Job (Job 31:1) than to let them wander
to God's dishonour, and our own discomfort.

There are these three things which discover a man or woman too much
inclining to the uncleanness of their own hearts.

(1.) The first is a wanton eye, or an eye that doth secretly
affect itself with such objects as are tickling of the heart with
the thoughts of immodesty and uncleanness. Isaiah calls this a
wanton eye: and Peter an eye full of adultery, that cannot cease
from sin (2 Peter 2:14; Isa 3:16). This is that also which Christ
calleth an evil eye, and John the lust of the flesh, and of the
eyes, and doth defile those who are not very watchful over their
own hearts (Mark 7:22; 1 John 2:16). This wanton eye is that which
the most holy saints should take heed of, because it is apt to seize
upon them also. When Paul bids Timothy beseech the young women to
walk as becomes the gospel, he bids him do it with all purity (1 Tim
5:1, 2). As, who should say, Take heed that while thou instructest
them to holiness, thou thyself be not corrupted with the lust of
thy eye. O how many souls, in the day of God, will curse the day
that ever they gave way to a wanton eye!

(2.) The second thing that discovereth one much inclining to the
lusts of uncleanness, it is wanton and immodest talk; such as that
brazen-faced whore in the 7th of the Proverbs had, or such as they
in Peter, who allured 'through the lusts of the flesh, through
much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who live
in error' (2 Peter 2:18). 'Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh,' wherefore if we be saints, let us take heed, as
of our eye, so of our tongue, and let not the lust of uncleanness,
or of adultery, be once named among us, 'named among us as becometh
saints' (Eph 5:3). Mark, 'Let it not be once named.' This implies,
that the lusts of uncleanness are devilishly taking, they will
both take the heart with eyes and tongue: 'Let it not be once named
among you,' &c.

(3.) Another thing that bespeaks a man or woman inclining to
wantonness and uncleanness, it is an adorning themselves in light
and wanton apparel. The attire of an harlot is too frequently in
our day the attire of professors; a vile thing, and argueth much
wantonness and vileness of affections. If those that give way to
a wanton eye, wanton words, and immodest apparel, be not whores,
&c., in their hearts, I know not what to say. Doth a wanton eye
argue shamefacedness? Doth wanton talk argue chastity? And doth
immodest apparel, with stretched-out necks, naked breasts, a made
speech, and mincing gaits, &c., argue mortification of lusts? If
any say, that these things may argue pride as well as carnal lusts;
well, but why are they proud? Is it not to trick up the body? And
why do they with pride trick up the body, if it be not to provoke
both themselves and others to lusts? God knoweth their hearts
without their outsides: and we know their hearts by their outsides.

My friends, I am here treating of good works, and persuading you to
fly those things that are hindrances to them: wherefore bear with
my plainness when I speak against sin. I would strike it through
with every word, because else it will strike us through with many
sorrows (1 Tim 6:9, 10). I do not treat of good works as if the
doing of them would save us, for we are justified by his grace,
according to the hope of eternal life; yet our sins and evil works
will lay us obnoxious to the judgments both of God and man. He
that walketh not uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel,
is like to have his peace assaulted often, both by the devil, the
law, death, and hell; yea, and is like to have God hide his face
from him also, for the iniquity of his covetousness (Isa 57:17).

How can he that carrieth himself basely in the sight of men, think
he yet well behaveth himself in the sight of God? And if so dim
a light as is in man can justly count thee as a transgressor, how
shall thy sins be hid from him whose 'eye-lids try the children of
men?' (Psa 11:4).

It is true, faith without works justifies us before God (Rom 3:28;
4:5): yet that faith that is alone, will be found to leave us
sinners in the sight both of God and man (James 2:18). And though
thou addest nothing to that which saveth thee by what thou canst
do, yet thy righteousness may profit the son of man; as also saith
the text: but if thou shalt be so careless as to say, What care I
for being righteous to profit others? I tell thee, that the love
of God is not in thee (Job 35:8; 1 John 3:17; 1 Cor 13:1-3). Walk
therefore in God's ways, and do them, for this is your wisdom and
your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear
of all these statutes, and say, 'This great nation is a wise and
understanding people' (Deu 4:6).

THIRD. Observe. Every believer should not only take heed that his
works be good, and so for the present do them, but should carefully
study to maintain them; that is, to keep in a continual exercise
of them.

It is an easier matter to begin to do good, than it is to continue
therein; and the reason is, there is not so much of a Christian's
cross in the beginning of a work, as there is in a continual,
hearty, conscientious practice thereof. Therefore Christians have
need, as to be pressed to do good, so to continue the work. Man, by
nature, is rather a hearer than a doer, Athenian like, continually
listening after some new thing; seeing many things, but observing
nothing (Acts 17:20; Isa 42:20). It is observable, that after
Christ had divided his hearers into four parts, he condemned three
of them for fruitless hearers (Luke 8:5-8). O it is hard continuing
believing, continuing loving, continuing resisting all that opposeth;
we are subject to be weary of well-doing (Gal 6:9). To pluck out
right eyes, to cut off right hands and feet, is no pleasant thing
to flesh and blood; and yet none but these shall have the promise
of life; because none but these will be found to have the effectual
work of God's grace in their souls (Matt 18:8, 9): 'If ye continue
in my word, then are you my disciples' INDEED (Matt 24:13; John
8:31). And hence it is, that you find so many IFS in the Scripture
about men's happiness; as, 'if children, then heirs;' and 'if
ye continue in the faith;' and 'if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end' (Rom 8:17; Col 1:23; Heb 3:14).
Not that their continuing in the way of God is the cause of the
work being right; but the work being right causeth the continuance
therein. As John saith in another place, 'They went out from us,
but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, [saith he]
they would, no doubt, have continued with us' (1 John 2:19). But
I say, where the work of God indeed is savingly begun, even there
is flesh, corruption, and the body of death to oppose it. Therefore
should Christians take heed, and look that against these opposites
they maintain a continual course of good works among men.

Besides, as there is that in our own bowels that opposeth goodness,
so there is the tempter, the wicked one, both to animate these lusts,
and to join with them in every assault against every appearance
of God in our souls. And hence it is, that he is called the devil,
the enemy, the destroyer, and him that seeks continually to devour
us (1 Peter 5:8), I need say no more but this. He that will walk
like a Christian indeed, as he shall find it is requisite that he
continue in good works, so his continuing therein will be opposed;
if therefore he will continue therein, he must make it his business
to study how to oppose those that oppose such a life, that he may
continue therein.

FOURTH. Now then to help in this, here fitly comes in the last
observation, to wit, That the best way both to provoke ourselves
and others to good works, it is to be often affirming to others the
doctrine of justification by grace, and to believe it ourselves.
'This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be
careful to maintain good works' (Titus 3:8).

I told you before, that good works must flow from faith: and now I
tell you, that the best way to be fruitful in them, is to be much
in the exercise of the doctrine of justification by grace; and they
both agree; for as faith animates to good works, so the doctrine of
grace animates faith. Wherefore, the way to be rich in good works,
it is to be rich in faith; and the way to be rich in faith is to
be conscientiously affirming the doctrine of grace to others, and
believing it ourselves.

First, To be constantly affirming it to others. Thus Paul tells
Timothy, that if he put the brethren in mind of the truths of the
gospel, he himself should not only be a good minister of Christ, but
should be nourished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine
(1 Tim 4:6). It is the ordinance of God, that Christians should
be often asserting the things of God each to others; and that by
their so doing they should edify one another (Heb 10:24, 25;1 Thess
5:11).

The doctrine of the gospel is like the dew and the small rain that
distilleth upon the tender grass, wherewith it doth flourish, and
is kept green (Deu 32:2). Christians are like the several flowers
in a garden, that have upon each of them the dew of heaven, which
being shaken with the wind, they let fall their dew at each other's
roots, whereby they are jointly nourished, and become nourishers
of one another. For Christians to commune savourly of God's matters
one with another, it is as if they opened to each other's nostrils
boxes of perfume.19 Saith Paul to the church at Rome, 'I long to
see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end
ye may be established; that is, that I may be comforted together
with you, by the mutual faith both of you and me' (Rom 1:11, 12).
Christians should be often affirming the doctrine of grace, and
justification by it, one to another.

Second, As they should be thus doing, so they should live in the
power of it themselves; they should by faith suck and drink in
this doctrine, as the good ground receiveth the rain; which being
done, forthwith there is proclaimed good works. Paul to the Colossians
saith thus, 'We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, praying always for you, since we heard of your faith in
Christ Jesus, and love to all the saints; for the hope which is
laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of
the truth of the gospel, which is come unto you, as it is in all
the world, and bringeth forth fruit, as it doth also in you.' But
how long ago? Why, 'since the day ye heard it, [saith he,] and knew
the grace of God in truth' (Col 1:3-6).

Apples and flowers are not made by the gardener; but are an effect
of the planting and watering. Plant in the sinner good doctrine,
and let it be watered with the word of grace; and as the effect
of that, there is the fruits of holiness, and the end everlasting
life (Rom 6:22).

Good doctrine is the doctrine of the gospel, which showeth to men,
that God clotheth them with the righteousness of his Son freely,
and maketh him with all his benefits over to them; by which free
gift the sinner is made righteous before God; and because he is
so, therefore there is infused a principle of grace into the heart,
whereby it is both quickened, and bringing forth fruit (Rom 3:21-26;
1 Cor 1:30; 2 Cor 5:21; John 1:16).

Now then, seeing good works do flow from faith, and seeing faith
is nourished by an affirming of the doctrine of the gospel, &c.,
take here these few considerations from the doctrine of the gospel,
for the support of thy faith, that thou mayest be indeed fruitful
and rich in good works.

Consider 1. The whole Bible was given for this very end, that thou
shouldest both believe this doctrine, and live in the comfort and
sweetness of it: 'For whatsoever things were written aforetime were
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope' (Rom 15:4; John 20:31).

Consider 2. That therefore every promise in the Bible is thine, to
strengthen, quicken, and encourage thy heart in believing.

Consider 3. That there is nothing that thou dost, can so please God
as believing; 'The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in
those that hope in his mercy' (Psa 147:11). They please him, because
they embrace his righteousness, &c.

Consider 4. That all the withdrawings of God from thee, are not
for the weakening, but for the trial of thy faith; and also, that
whatever he suffers Satan, or thy own heart to do, it is not to
weaken faith (Job 23:8-10; 1 Peter 1:7).

Consider 5. That believing is that which will keep in thy view the
things of heaven and glory; and that at which the devil will be
discouraged, sin weakened, and thy heart quickened and sweetened
(Heb 11:27; James 4:7; 1 Peter 5:9; Eph 6:16; Rom 15:13).

Consider lastly, By believing, the lover of God is kept with warmth
upon the heart, and that this will provoke thee continually to bless
God for Christ, for grace, for faith, hope, and all these things,
either in God, or thee, that doth accompany salvation (2 Cor 2:14;
Psa 103:1-3).

Third, The doctrine of the forgiveness of sins received by faith,
will make notable work in the heart of a sinner, to bring forth
good works. But, Forasmuch as there is a body of death and sin
in every one that hath the grace of God in this world; and because
this body of death will be ever opposing that which is good, as
the apostle saith (Rom 7:21), therefore take these few particulars
further, for the suppressing that which will hinder a fruitful
life.

1. Keep a continual watch over the wretchedness of thy own heart,
not to be discouraged at the sight of thy vileness, but to prevent
its wickedness; for that will labour either to hinder thee from
doing good works, or else will hinder thee in the doing thereof;
for evil is present with thee for both these purposes. Take heed
then, that thou do not listen to that at any time, but deny, though
with much struggling, the workings of sin to the contrary.

2. Let this be continually before thy heart, that God's eye is
upon thee, and seeth every secret turning of thy heart, either to
or from him: 'All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him
with whom we have to do' (Heb 4:13).

3. If thou deny to do that good which thou oughtest, with what thy
God hath given thee; then consider, that though he love thy soul,
yet he can chastise; First, Thy inward man with such troubles,
that thy life shall be restless and comfortless. Secondly, And can
also so blow upon thy outward man, that all thou gettest shall be
put in a bag with holes (Psa 89:31-33; Hag 1:6). And set the case
he should licence but one thief among thy substance, or one spark
of fire among thy barns, how quickly might that be spent ill, and
against thy will, which thou shouldest have spent to God's glory,
and with thy will; and I tell thee further, that if thou want a heart
to do good when thou hast about thee, thou mayest want comfort in
such things thyself from others, when thine is taken from thee.
See Jude 1:6, 7.

4. Consider, that a life full of good works is the only way, on
thy part, to answer the mercy of God extended to thee; God hath
had mercy on thee, and hath saved thee from all thy distresses; God
hath not stuck to give thee his Son, his Spirit, and the kingdom
of heaven. Saith Paul, 'I beseech you therefore by the mercies of
God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
unto God, which is your reasonable service' (Rom 12:1; Matt 18:32,
33).

5. Consider, that this is the way to convince all men, that the power
of God's things hath taken hold of thy heart I speak to them that
hold the head 20and say what thou wilt, if thy faith be not accompanied
with a holy life, thou shalt be judged a withered branch, a wording
professor, salt without savour, and as lifeless as a sounding brass,
and a tinkling cymbal (John 15; Matt 13:1 Cor 13:1, 2). For, say
they, show us your faith by your works, for we cannot see your
hearts (James 2:18). But I say on the contrary, if thou walk as
becomes thee who art saved by grace, then thou wilt witness in
every man's conscience, that thou art a good tree; now thou leavest
guilt on the heart of the wicked (1 Sam 24:16, 17). Now thou takest
off occasion from them that desire occasion; and now thou art clear
from the blood of all men (2 Cor 11:12; Acts 20:26, 31-35). This
is the man also that provoketh others to good works. The ear that
heareth such a man shall bless him; and the eye that seeth him
shall bear witness to him. 'Surely,' saith David, 'he shall not be
moved for ever: The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance'
(Heb 10:24; Job 29:11; Psa 112: 6).

6. Again, The heart that is fullest of good works, hath in it
at least room for Satan's temptations. And this is the meaning of
Peter, where he saith, 'Be sober, be vigilant;' that is, be busying
thyself in faith and holiness, 'because, your adversary the devil,
as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour' (1
Peter 5:8). 'He that walketh uprightly, walketh safely; and they
that add to faith, virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge,
temperance; to temperance, brotherly kindness; and to these charity;
and that abounds therein, he shall neither be barren nor unfruitful;
he shall never fall; but so an entrance shall be ministered to him
abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ' (2 Peter 1:5-10; Prov 10:9).

7. The man who is fullest of good works, he is fittest to live and
fittest to die: 'I am now,' at any time, 'ready to be offered,'
saith fruitful Paul (2 Tim 4:6). Whereas he that is barren, he is
neither fit to live, nor fit to die: to die, he himself is convinced
he is not fit, and to live God himself saith he is not fit; 'cut
him down, why doth he cumber the ground?' (Luke 8:7).

Lastly, Consider, to provoke thee to good works, thou shalt have
of God when thou comest to glory, a reward for everything thou dost
for him on earth. Little do the people of God consider, how richly
God will reward, what from a right principle and to a right end,
is done for him here; not a bit of bread to the poor, not a draught
of water to the meanest of them that belong to Christ, or the loss
of a hair of your head, shall in that day go without its reward
(Luke 14:13, 14; Matt 10:42).

'For our light affliction,' and so all other pieces of self-denial,
'which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory' (2 Cor 4:17). I tell thee, Christian, be
but rich in good works, and thou shalt have more than salvation;
thy salvation thou hast freely by grace through Christ, without
works (Eph 2:8-10), but now being justified and saved, and as the
fruits hereof, renewed by the Holy Ghost; after this, I say, thou
shalt be rewarded for every work that proved good; 'For God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love, which ye have
showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints,
and do minister' (Heb 6:10; 1 Cor 3:14). Moses counted the reward
that he was to have, for a short suffering with the people of
God, of greater worth than the treasures of Egypt, the smiles of
the king, or the honour of his kingdom (Heb 11:25-27). In a word,
let the disappointments that do, and shall most surely befall the
fruitless professors, provoke thee to look with all diligence to
thy standing. For,

1. Such a one is but deceived and disappointed touching the work of
grace he supposeth to be in his heart; he thinks he is a Christian,
and hath grace, as faith, hope, and the like, in his soul, yet
no fruits of these things manifest themselves in him; indeed his
tongue is tipt with a talk and tattle of religion. Poor man, poor
empty man! Faith without works is dead; thy hope shall be as the
giving up of the ghost; thy gifts with which thy soul is possessed,
are but such as are common to reprobates; thou art therefore
disappointed; God reputes thee still but wicked, though thou comest
and goest to the place of the Holy (James 2:19, 20; Job 11:20; 1
Cor 13:1-3).

2. Therefore all thy joy and comfort must needs fall short of saving
comfort, and so leave thee in the suds notwithstanding; thy joy is
the joy of the Pharisees (John 5:35), and thy gladness as that of
Herod (Mark 6:20), and the longest time it can last, it is but a
Scripture-moment (Job 20:5). Alas! in all thy gladness and content
with thy religion, thou art but like the boy that plays with brass
instead of gold; and with counters instead of that which will go
for current coin. Thus, 'if a man think himself to be something when
he is nothing, he deceiveth [or disappoints] himself' (Gal 6:3).

3. This is not all, but look thou certainly for an eternal disappointment
in the day of God; for it must be; thy lamp will out at the first
sound the trump of God shall make in thine ears; thou canst not
hold up at the appearance of the Son of God in his glory; his very
looks will be to thy profession as a strong wind is to a blinking
candle, and thou shalt be left only to smoke.

Oh the alteration that will befal a foolish virgin! She thought she
was happy, and that she should have received happiness with those
that were right at the heart; but behold the contrary, her lamp is
going out, she is now to seek for saving grace, when the time of
grace is over? Her heaven she thought of, is proved a hell, and
her god is proved a devil. God hath cast her out of his presence,
and claps the door upon her. She pleads her profession, and the
like, and she hath for her answer repulses from heaven. 'So are
the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite's hope shall
perish; whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a
spider's web. He shall lean upon his house but it shall not stand;
he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure' (Matt 25:1-10; Luke
8:25, 26; Job 8:13-15).

Take heed therefore; thy soul, heaven, and eternity, lies at stake;
yea, they turn either to thee or from thee upon the hinge of thy
faith; if it be right, all is thine: if wrong, then all is lost,
however thy hopes and expectations are to the contrary: 'For in Jesus
Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision;
but faith which worketh by love. Let no man deceive you with vain
words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the
children of unbelief. 21 For the earth which drinketh in the rain
that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by
whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God: but that which
beareth thorns and briars is REJECTED, and is nigh unto cursing,
whose end is to be burned' (Gal 5:6; Eph 5:3-6; Heb 6:7, 8).

Object. But what shall I do, who am so cold, slothful, and
heartless, that I cannot find any heart to do any work for God in
this world? Indeed time was when his dew rested all night upon my
branches, and when I could with desire, with earnest desire, be
doing and working for God; but, alas! now it is otherwise.

Answer.

If this be true, thy case is sad, thou art to be pitied; the Lord
pity thee. And for thy recovery out of this condition, I would give
thee no other counsel than was given to Ephesus when she had lost
her first love.

1. 'Remember,' saith Christ, 'from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do the first works,' &c. (Rev 2:5).

Mark: Thy first work is to enter into a serious considering, and
remembrance from whence thou art fallen. Remember that thou hast
left thy God, the stay of thy soul, and him without whom there
is no stay, comfort, or strength, for thee either to do or suffer
anything in this world: 'Without me,' saith he, 'ye can do nothing'
(John 15:5). A sad condition; the remembrance of this, for certain,
is the first step to the recovering a backsliding heart; for the
right remembrance of this doth bring to mind what loss that soul
hath sustained that is in this condition, how it hath lost its
former visits, smiles, and consolations of God. When thy conscience
was suppled with the blood of thy Saviour; when every step thou
tookest was, as it were, in honey and butter; and when thy heart
could meditate terror with comfort (Job 29:2-6; Isa 33:14-19).
Instead of which, thou feelest darkness, hardness of heart, and
the thoughts of God are terrible to thee (Psa 77:3). Now God never
visits thee; or if he doth, it is but as a wayfaring man, that
tarrieth but for a night (Jer 14:8, 9).

This also brings to mind how the case is altered with thee, touching
thy confidence in God for thy future happiness, how uncertain thou
now art of thy hopes for heaven, how much this life doth hang in
doubt before thee (Deu 28:65, 66).

2. 'Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent.'
These are words well put together; for a solid considering of what
I have lost in my declining, will provoke in my heart a sorrow, and
godly heaviness, whereby I shall be forced to bemoan my condition,
and say, 'I will go and return to my first husband, for then was
it better with me than now' (Hos 2:7). And believe it, the reason
of God's standing off from giving the comfortable communion with
himself, it is that thou mightest first see the difference between
sticking close to God, and forsaking of him; and next, that thou
mightest indeed acknowledge thy offence, and seek his face (Hos
5:15). He taketh no pleasure in thy forlorn condition; he had rather
thou shouldest have him in thy bosom, only he will have it in his
own way. 'He looketh upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; [then] he
will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall
see the light' (Job 33:27, 28).

3. 'Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works.'

As there should be a remembering and a repenting so there should
be a hearty doing our first works; a believing as before, a laying
hold of the things of heaven and glory, as at the first; for now
is God returned to thee, as before (Zech 1:16). And though thou
mayest, through the loss of thy locks, with Samson, be weak at the
first, yet, in short time, thy hair will grow again; that is, thy
former experience will in short space be as long, large, and strong,
as in the former times. Indeed at the first thou wilt find all the
wheels of thy soul rusty, and all the strings of thine heart out
of tune; as also when thou first beginnest to stir, the dust and
filth of thy heart will, like smoke, trouble thee from that clear
beholding the grace of thy God, and his love to thy soul; but yet
wait, and go on, and though thou findest thyself as unable to do
anything as thou formerly couldest; yet I say, up, and be doing,
and the Lord will be with thee; for he hath not despised the day
of thy small things (1 Chron 22:16; Zech 4:10).

I know thou wilt be afflicted with a thousand temptations to drive
thee to despair, that thy faith may be faint, &c. But against all
them set thou the word of God, the promise of grace, the blood of
Christ, and the examples of God's goodness to the great backsliders
that are for thy encouragement recorded in the scriptures of truth;
and remember, that turning to God after backsliding, is the greatest
piece of service thou canst do for him, and the greatest honour
thou canst bring to the blood of Christ; and know farther, that
God, to show his willing reception of so unworthy a creature, saith,
there shall be joy in heaven at thy conversion to him again (Luke
15:7, 10).

TO CONCLUDE.

If thou yet, notwithstanding what hath been said, dost remain a
backslider:

1. Then remember that thou must die; and remember also, that when
the terrors of God, of death, and a backslidden heart, meet together,
there will be sad work in that soul; this is the man that hangeth
tilting over the mouth of hell, while death is cutting the thread
of his life.

2. Remember, that though God doth sometimes, yea, often, receive
backsliders, yet it is not always so. Some draw back into perdition;
for, because they have flung up God, and would none of him, he in
justice flings up them and their souls for ever (Prov 1:24-28).

I have observed, that sometimes God, as it were in revenge for
injury done him, doth snatch away souls in the very nick of their
backsliding, as he served Lot's wife, when he turned her into
a pillar of salt, even while she was looking over her shoulder to
Sodom (Gen 19:26). An example that every backslider should remember
with astonishment (Luke 17:32).

Thus have I, in few words, written to you, before I die, a word to
provoke you to faith and holiness, because I desire that you may
have the life that is laid up for all them that believe in the
Lord Jesus, and love one another, when I am deceased. Though there
I shall rest from my labours, and be in paradise, as through grace
I comfortably believe, yet it is not there, but here, I must do
you good. Wherefore, I not knowing the shortness of my life, nor
the hindrance that hereafter I may have of serving my God and you,
I have taken this opportunity to present these few lines unto you
for your edification.

Consider what hath been said; and the Lord give you understanding
in all things. Farewell.

FOOTNOTES

1 Hermotimus of Lucian. During one of these wanderings his wife
thought him dead, and his body was burnt. Whether the poor soul,
thus suddenly ejected, obtained another habitation is not narrated.

2 'Of their relations,' related or belonging to themselves. Ed.

3 Also where the gardener hath set them, there they stand, and
quarrel not one with another. Pilgrim, part 2. Interpreter's House,
vol. 3. 186; see also vol. 2. 570. Ed.

4 'Where the great red dragon Satan had his seat.'Dr. Gill's
Commentary. See also Revelation 12 Ed.

5 This manly, bold, and upright statement of truth, was published
in 1674, only two years afer the author's deliverance from twelve
years and a half's incarceration in a damp, miserable jail, for
nonconformity! None but those whose close communion with God inspires
them with the confessor's courage, can understand the spirit which
dictated such language. Had all dissenters used such faithful words,
the church would long ago have been emancipated from persecution
in this country. Ed.

6 This is a very extensive and awful delusion. To mistake the
'outward and visible sign' for the 'inward and spiritual grace' is
a very general and fatal error. Of it's sad effects all religious
parties have warned their members. It has done infinite mischief
to the souls of men. Ed.

7 The queen of Sheba was as much or more delighted with the order,
harmony, and happiness of Solomon's household than she was with
all his splendour and magnificence. It is to this Bunyan refers in
this quotation. Ed.

8 'Though the words of the wise--are as nails fastened by the master
of assemblies (Eccl. 12:11) yet sure their examples are the hammer
to drive them in to take the deeper hold. A father that whipt his
son for swearing, and swore himself while he whipt him, did more
harm by his example than good by his correction.'Fuller's Holy
State, p. 11. Ed.

9 How exceedingly admirable are all these scriptural directions,
warnings, and cautions. Happy are those parents and their children
where such wisdom is manifested in that painful duty of administering
counsel and correction. Ed. 10 One of the Saxon laws was, that
if a serf or villain work on Sunday by his lord's command, he shall
be a free man. Spelman's Concilia, An. 692. Ed.

11 The rust of money in the rich man's purse, unjustly detained
from the labourer, will poison and infect his whole estate. Fuller's
Holy State, p. 16. Ed.

12 The apostle Peter, in his solemn injunctions to married persons,
commences with the wife. Fuller observes upon this, 'And sure it
was fitting that women should first have their lesson given them,
because it is harder to be learned, and therefore they need have
the more time to con it.' Holy State, p. 1. Ed.

13 'In her husband's absence she is wife and deputy husband, which
makes her double the files of her diligence. At his return he finds
all things so well, that he wonders to see himself at home when he
was abroad.'Fuller's Holy State, p. 2. Ed.

14 'She never crosseth her husband in the spring-tide of his anger,
but stays till it be ebbing water.'Fuller's Maxims. Ed.

15 Bunyan's words are 'to show pity,' probably taken from the
word 'goodness' in the margin of the Bible; but lest it might be a
typographical error, the usual rendering is given in this quotation.
Ed.

16 'What is the child but a piece of the parents wrapped up in another skin.'Flavel.
    On seeing a Mother with her Infant asleep in her Arms.
    'Thine is the morn of life,
    All laughing, unconscious of the evening with her anxious cares,
    Thy mother filled with the purest happiness and bliss
    Which an indulgent Heaven bestows upon a lower world,
    Watches and protects her dearest life, now sleeping in her arms.'
        German Poem. Ed.

17 Bunyan's silence, in all his writings, concerning the state of
his parents as to godliness, may lead us to fear that this fervent
ejaculation had often been poured forth by his own soul on behalf
of his father and mother. All that we know of them is, that they
were poor, but gave their children the best education their means
afforded; as to their piety he is silent. Ed.

18 'To the Greeks.' Bunyan in this follows the Puritan translation.
The word 'Greeks' is in the margin of the authorized Bible. Ed.

19 This is a most beautiful passage, unequalled by any ancient or
modern author. Such a view of church fellowship does honour to the
head and heart of the prince of allegorists. It is worthy to be
printed in letters of gold, and presented to every candidate for
church fellowship among all Christian societies of every denomination.
See p. 550, and note. Ed.

20 To 'hold the head' is to make a very prominent profession of
religion. Ed.

21 'Of unbelief' see margin of the Bible. Ed.

***

A CAUTION TO STIR UP TO WATCH AGAINST SIN

BY J. BUNYAN


ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

This faithful and affectionate appeal to conscience, was originally
published on a half-sheet of copy paper, and being only printed
on one side of the leaf was called a broadside; probably intended
to hang up in the house, or to be pasted inside the cover of the
family bible.

Charles Doe gives the date 1685; but a copy of this rare sheet,
clean and perfect as when first printed, was lately discovered
in the Stowe Library, among a great number of single-sheet poems,
songs, and proclamations; a memorandum on it, in the writing of
Narcissus Luttrel, shews that he bought it for one penny, on the
8th of April, 1684. By the liberal permission of Mr. Pickering,
of Piccadilly, the present owner of that extraordinary collection,
I have been able accurately to correct the very numerous alterations
and errors which abound in all the later editions.

Reader, whoever thou art, but especially the young, this unassuming
poem is most worthy of being committed to memory. It is a striking
detection of the devil's sophistry. Strive, as you value your
peace and happiness, to escape the depths of moral degradation
and misery, by avoiding the FIRST overtures of sin.--GEO. OFFOR.


CAUTION TO STIR UP TO WATCH AGAINST SIN

The first eight lines one did commend to me,
The rest I thought good to commend to thee:
Reader, in reading be thou rul'd by me,
With rhimes nor lines, but truths, affected be.[1]
8 April 1684

I.
Sin will at first, just like a beggar, crave
One penny or one half-penny to have;
And if you grant its first suit, 'twill aspire,
From pence to pounds, and so will still mount higher
To the whole soul: but if it makes its moan,
Then say, here is not for you, get you gone.
For if you give it entrance at the door,
It will come in, and may go out no more.

II.
Sin, rather than 'twill out of action be,
Will pray to stay, though but a while with thee;
One night, one hour, one moment, will it cry,
Embrace me in thy bosom, else I die:
Time to repent [saith it] I will allow,
And help, if to repent thou know'st not how.
But if you give it entrance at the door,
It will come in, and may go out no more.

III.
If begging doth not do, sin promise will
Rewards to those that shall its lusts fulfill:
Penny in hand, yea pounds 'twill offer thee,
If at its beck and motion thou wilt be.
'Twill seem heaven to out-bid, and all to gain
Thy love, and win thee it to entertain.
But give it not admittance at thy door,
Lest it comes in, and so goes out no more.

IV.
If begging and promising will not do,
'Twill by its wiles attempt to flatter you.
I'm harmless, mean no ill, be not so shy
Will ev'ry soul-destroying motion cry.
'Twill hide its sting, 'twill change its native hue,
Vile 'twill not, but a beauty seem to you.
But if you give it entrance at the door,
Its sting will in, and may come out no more.

V.
Rather than fail, sin will itself divide,
Bid thee do this, and lay the rest aside.
Take little ones ('twill say) throw great ones by,
(As if for little sins men should not die.)
Yea SIN with SIN a quarrel will maintain,
On purpose that thou by it might'st be slain.
Beware the cheat then, keep it out of door,
It would come in, and would go out no more.

VI.
Sin, if you will believe it, will accuse,
What is not hurtful and itself excuse:
'Twill make a vice of virtue, and 'twill say
Good is destructive, doth men's souls betray;
'Twill make a law, where God has made man free,
And break those laws by which men bounded be.
Look to thyself then, keep it out of door,
Thee 'twould entangle, and enlarge thy score.

VII.
SIN is that beastly thing that will defile
Soul, body, name, and fame in little while;
'Twill make him, who some time God's image was,
Look like the devil, love, and plead his cause;
Like to the plague, poison, or leprosy
Defile 'twill, and infect contagiously.
Wherefore beware, against it shut the door;
If not, it will defile thee more and more.

VIII.
SIN, once possessed of the heart, will play
The tyrant, force its vassal to obey:
'Twill make thee thine own happiness oppose
And offer open violence to those
That love thee best; yea make thee to defy
The law and counsel of the deity.
Beware then, keep this tyrant out of door,
Lest thou be his, and so thy own no more.

IX.
SIN harden can the heart against its God,
Make it abuse his grace, despise his rod,
'Twill make one run upon the very pikes,
Judgments foreseen bring such to no dislikes
Of sinful hazards; no, they venture shall
For one base lust, their soul, and heav'n and all.
Take heed then, hold it, crush it at the door,
It comes to rob thee, and to make thee poor.

X.
SIN is a prison, hath its bolts and chains,
Brings into bondage who it entertains;
Hangs shackles on them, bends them to its will,
Holds them, as Samson grinded at the mill,
'Twill blind them, make them deaf; yea, 'twill them gag,
And ride them as the devil rides his hag.
Wherefore look to it, keep it out of door,
If once its slave, thou may'st be free no more.

XI.
Though SIN at first its rage dissemble may,
'Twill soon upon thee as a lion prey;
'Twill roar, 'twill rend, 'twill tear, 'twill kill out-
right,
Its living death will gnaw thee day and night:
Thy pleasures now to paws and teeth it turns,
In thee its tickling lusts, like brimstone burns.
Wherefore beware, and keep it out of door,
Lest it should on thee as a lion roar.

XII.
SIN will accuse, will stare thee in the face,
Will for its witnesses quote time and place
Where thou committedst it; and so appeal
To conscience, who thy facts will not conceal;
But on thee as a judge such sentence pass,
As will to thy sweet bits prove bitter sauce.
Wherefore beware, against it shut thy door,
Repent what's past, believe and sin no more.

XIII.
SIN is the worm of hell, the lasting fire,
Hell would soon lose its heat, could SIN expire;
Better sinless, in hell, than to be where
Heav'n is, and to be found a sinner there.
One sinless, with infernals might do well,
But SIN would make a very heav'n a hell.
Look to thyself then, to keep it out of door,
Lest it gets in, and never leaves thee more.

XIV.
No match hast sin save God in all the world,
Men, angels it has from their stations hurl'd:
Holds them in chains, as captives, in despite
Of all that here below is called Might.
Release, help, freedom from it none can give,
But he by whom we also breathe and live.
Watch therefore, keep this giant out of door
Lest if once in, thou get him out no more.

XV.
Fools make a mock at SIN, will not believe,
It carries such a dagger in its sleeve;
How can it be (say they) that such a thing,
So full of sweet, should ever wear a sting:
They know not that it is the very SPELL
Of SIN, to make men laugh themselves to hell.
Look to thyself then, deal with SIN no more,
Lest he that saves, against thee shuts the door.

XVI.
Now let the God that is above,
That hath for sinners so much love;
These lines so help thee to improve,
That towards him thy heart may move.
Keep thee from enemies external,
Help thee to fight with those internal:
Deliver thee from them infernal,
And bring thee safe to life eternal.--AMEN.

London: Printed for N. Ponder at the Peacock in the
Poultrey.



FOOTNOTE:

1. This same sentiment is well expressed in Bunyan's verses at
the conclusion of the Pilgrim, part First.


'Nor let my figure or similitude
Put thee into a laughter or a feud;
Leave this to boys and fools, but as for thee,
Do thou the substance of my matter see.'


***

A DISCOURSE OF THE BUILDING, NATURE, EXCELLENCY, AND GOVERNMENT
OF THE HOUSE OF GOD; WITH COUNSELS AND DIRECTIONS TO THE INHABITANTS
THEREOF.

BY JOHN BUNYAN, OF BEDFORD.

'Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place
where thine honour dwelleth.'--Psalm 26:8

ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

Beautiful in its simplicity is this treatise on the Church of
Christ, by John Bunyan. He opens, with profound knowledge and
eminent skill, all those portions of sacred writ which illustrate the
nature, excellency, and government of the house of God, with the
personal and relative duties of its inhabitants. It was originally
published in a pocket volume of sixty-three pages, by G. Larkin,
1688, and is now for the first time reprinted. We are deeply
indebted to the unknown owner of this rare volume, and to Mr.
Creasy, bookseller, Sleaford, through whom the copy was borrowed
to enrich this edition.

What is the church? is a question upon which all the subtilty of
jesuitic schoolmen and casuists has been exhausted, to mystify
and mislead the honest inquirer in every age. The Jews, Papists,
Greeks, English, have each claimed the divine favour as being
exclusively limited to their respective sects. Apostolic descent
has been considered to depend upon human ceremonies, instead
of its consisting in a similarity of mind and conduct to that of
the apostles, through the powerful influences of the Holy Spirit
upon the heart. Judging from this latter mode, we conclude that
Bunyan the brazier was very nearly related to, and descended from,
Paul the tentmaker, and the other apostles. But we form a very
different judgment as to the descent of Bonner and other persecuting
bishops.

A visible church of Christ is a congregation of the faithful, who
having personally and individually given themselves to the Saviour,
unite together to promote each other's spiritual happiness. Such
were the churches to whom the epistles in the New Testament were
addressed. The instructions given to this spiritual community, in
the following treatise, are drawn solely from the sacred volume,
and are full of peace and righteousness--tending purely to its
happiness and prosperity. If these directions were strictly and
constantly followed, our churches, notwithstanding the liability
of the members to err, would each present 'a little heaven below.'

The officers in these communities are--I. Bishops, or preaching
elders, to dispense the word and ordinances; a plurality in every
church, to supply the services of such as suffered under affliction
of body, or were imprisoned for conscience-sake. II. Ruling elders,
to assist the preachers--to admit the serious inquirer, or shut
out the profane backslider, and to re-admit the penitent--to watch
over the members, that they be diligent in their worldly callings,
that there be no drones or idlers--to heal offences--to feed the
church with admonitions, and to visit and comfort the sick. III.
Deacons, to manage the temporal affairs--provide for the Lord's
table and for that of the bishops and elders--and to distribute
the alms to the infirm and needy. IV. Female deacons, to nurse the
sick, and direct their attention to that home where there shall
be no more sorrow; and generally to aid the deacons and elders.

The duty of the private members is to walk humbly with God, and
to be devoted to each other's happiness. In all these particulars
Dr. John Cotton of New England, in his 'True Constitution of a
Visible Church,'[1] fully concurs with Bunyan, as does also Dr.
John Owen, in his 'Nature of a Gospel Church,' excepting that he is
silent as to female deacons. Let every church be thus affectionately
and scripturally governed, and in their works of faith and labours
of love they will become terrible to the enemy 'as an army with
banners' (Cant 6:4).

At the present day, great laxity of discipline has crept in. Some
offices have been discontinued, others altered, and it becomes
us most solemnly to judge ourselves by the unerring word of the
living God, whether we have deviated from the order recorded by
the Holy Ghost, and if so, to repent and return to the scriptural
model.--GEO. OFFOR




A DISCOURSE OF THE BUILDING, &c., OF THE HOUSE OF GOD.

I.

BY WHOM THIS HOUSE IS BUILT.

The builder's God, materials his Elect;
His Son's the rock on which it is erect;
The Scripture is his rule, plummet, or line,
Which gives proportion to this house divine,
His working-tools his ordinances are,
By them he doth his stones and timber square,
Affections knit in love, the couplings are;
Good doctrine like to mortar doth cement
The whole together, schism to prevent:
His compass, his decree; his hand's the Spirit
By which he frames, what he means to inherit,
A holy temple, which shall far excel
That very place, where now the angels dwell.

Call this a temple or a house of prayer,
A palace, oracle, or spouse most fair;
Or what you will: God's love is here displayed,
And here his treasure safely up is laid;
For his own darling none can find a place,
Where he, as here, is wont to show his face.

What though some slight it, it a cottage call,
Give't the reproachful name of beggar's hall;
Yea, what though to some it an eyesore is,
What though they count it base, and at it hiss,
Call it an alms-house, builded for the poor;
Yet kings of old have begged at the door.


II.

OF THE BEAUTY OF THE CHURCH.

Lo her foundations laid with sapphires are;
Her goodly windows made of agates fair,
Her gates are carbuncles, or pearls; nor one
Of all her borders but's a precious stone;
None common, nor o' th' baser sort are here,
Nor rough, but squar'd and polish'd everywhere;
Her beams are cedars, fir her rafters be,
Her terraces are of the algum-tree;
The thorn or crab-tree here are not of us;
Who thinks them here utensils, puts abuse
Upon the place, yea, on the builder too;
Would they be thus controll'd in what they do?
With carved-work of lily, and palm-tree,
With cherubims and chains adorned be
The doors, the walls, and pillars of this place;
Forbidden beasts here must not show their face.
With grace like gold, as with fine painting, he
Will have this house within enriched be;
Fig-leaves nor rags, must here keep out no cold,
This builder covers all with cloth of gold,
Of needle-work prick'd more than once or twice
(The oft'ner prick'd, still of the higher price)
Wrought by his SON, put on her by his merit,
Applied by faith, revealed by the Spirit.


III.

OF THE CONVENIENCES OF THIS HOUSE.

Within these walls the builder did devise
That there the householders might sacrifice;
Here is an altar, and a laver too,
And priests abundance, temple work to do;
Nor want they living offerings, nor yet fire,
Nor holy garments; what divine desire
Commands, it has bestowed on this place;
Here be the censors, here's the throne of grace;
None of the householders need go elsewhere,
To offer incense, or good news to hear.

A throne for judgment he did here erect,
Virtue to cherish, folly to detect;
Statutes and laws, unto this house he gave,
To teach who to condemn, and who to save:
By things thus wholesome taught is every brother
To fear his God, and to love one another.

And now for pleasure, solace, recreation,
Here's such as helpeth forward man's salvation.
Equal to these none can be found elsewhere,
All else turn to profuseness, sin, and care.
So situate it is, so roomy, fair,
So warm, so blessed, with such wholesome air,
That 'tis enticing: whoso wishes well
To his soul's health, should covet here to dwell.
Here's necessaries, and what will delight
The godly ear, the palate, with the sight
Of each degree and sex; here's everything
To please a beggar, and delight a king.
Chambers and galleries, he did invent,
Both for a prospect and a retirement.
For such as unto music do incline,
Here are both harps and psalteries divine:
Her cellars and banqueting-house have been,
In former days, a palace for a queen.
O house! what title to thee can be given,
So fit as that which men do give to heaven!


IV.

OF THE STRENGTH AND DEFENCE OF THIS HOUSE.

This house, you may be sure, will always stand;
She's builded on a rock, not on the sand;
Storms, rain, yea floods have oft upon her beat,
Yet stands she, here's a proof she is no cheat;
Fear not therefore in her for to abide,
She keeps her ground, come weather, wind or tide.
Her corner-stone has many times been try'd,
But never could the scorn, or rage, or pride,
Of all her foes, by what force they could make,
Destroy her battlements, or ground-work shake.
Here's God the Lord encamping round about
His dwelling place; nor ought we once to doubt
But that he as a watchman succour will
Those that do dwell upon his holy hill.
A wall of fire about her I will be,
And glory in the midst of her, and she
Shall be the place where I my name record;
Here I will come and bless you, saith the Lord.

The holy watchers at her gates do stand,
With their destroying weapons in their hand,
Those to defend, that in this house do dwell,
From all her enemies in earth and hell;
Safety! where is it, if it is not here?
God dwelleth in her, doth for her appear,
To help her early, and her foes confound,
And unto her will make his grace abound;
Safety is here, and also that advance,[2]
Will make a beggar sing, a cripple dance.


V.

THE DELICATENESS OF THE SITUATION OF THIS HOUSE.

As her foundation and her beauty's much;
Conveniences, and her defences such
As none can parallel, so doth the field
About her richest, rarest dainties yield.
Moriah, where Isaac was offered,
Where David from his sin was ransomed;
Where Solomon the temple did erect,
Compar'd with this is worthy no respect.
Under the very threshold of this place
Arise those goodly springs of lasting grace,
Whose crystal streams minister like to those
That here of love to her, make their repose.
Sweet is her aid, (as one may well infer)
'Cause 'tis the breathings of the comforter.
The pomegranates at all her gates do grow,
Mandrakes and vines, with other dainties mo;[3]
Her gardens yield the chief, the richest spice,
Surpassing them of Adam's paradise:
Here be sweet ointments, and the best of gums;
Here runs the milk, here drops the honey-combs.
Here are perfumes most pleasant to the sense,
Here grows the goodly trees of frankincense;
Her arbours, walks, fountains, and pleasant springs,
Delightful formerly have been to kings.

Such mountains round about this house do stand
As one from thence may see the holy land.
Her fields are fertile, do abound with corn;
The lilies fair, her vallies do adorn.
The birds that do come hither every spring,
For birds, they are the very best that sing.
Her friends, her neighbours too, do call her blest;
Angels do here go by, turn in and rest.
The road to paradise lies by her gate,
Here pilgrims do themselves accommodate
With bed and board, and do such stories tell
As do for truth and profit all excel.
Nor doth the porter here say any nay,
That hither would turn in, that there would stay.
This house is rent-free; here the man may dwell
That loves his landlord, rules his passions well.


VI.

THE WAY OF RECEIVING THOSE THAT WOULD HERE INHABIT.

And wouldst thou know the customs of this place,
How men are here admitted to this grace;
And consequently whether thou mayst be
Made one of this most blest fraternity?
Come hither then, unto me lend an ear;
And what is doubtful to thee, I will clear.

1. This place, as mercy's arms, stands ope to those
That their own happiness us'd to oppose;
Those under hedges, high-way men, or they
That would not God, nor yet good men obey;
Those that among the bushes us'd to browse,
Or under hedges us'd themselves to louze.
The vilest men, of sinners who are chief,
A fornicator, liar, or a thief,
May turn in hither, here take up and dwell
With those who ransom'd are from death and hell.

2. This place, as hospitals, will entertain,
Those which the lofty of this world disdain:
The poor, the lame, the maimed, halt and blind,
The leprous, and possessed too, may find
Free welcome here, as also such relief
As ease them will of trouble, pain and grief.

3. This place, as David's heart, with free consent
Opens to th' distressed, and the discontent;
Who is in debt, that has not wherewithal
To quit his scores, may here be free from thrall:
That man that fears the bailiff, or the jail,
May find one here that will become his bail.

4. Art thou bound over to the great assize,
For heark'ning to the devil and his lies;
Art thou afraid thereat to shew thy head,
For fear thou then be sent unto the dead?
Thou may'st come hither, here is room and place,
For such as willingly would live by grace.

5. This place, as father's house in former days,
Is a receptacle for runaways;[4]
He that, like to the ox,[5] backslidden is,
Forfeited hath for sin his share of bliss;
May yet come hither, here is room and rest;
Of old such have come hither and been blest.
Had this been false, O woe had been to David!
Nor Peter had, nor Magdalen, been saved.
Nor Jonah, nor Manasseh, nor the rest;
No runaway from God could been blest
With kind reception at his hands; return
Would here come too late, if nought but burn
Had been the lot of the backsliding man:
But we are told there's no rebellion can
Prevent, or hinder him from being saved,
That mercy heartily of God hath crav'd.
She that went from her God to play the whore,
Returning may be as she was before:
He that refuses to his God to turn,
That is resolved in hell fire to burn;
If he bethinks himself, and turns again,
May find them here that will him entertain.

6. But bring thou with thee a certificate,
To show thou seest thyself most desolate;
Writ by the master, with repentance seal'd,
To shew also that here thou would'st be heal'd,
By those fair leaves of that most blessed tree,
By which alone poor sinners healed be;
And that thou dost abhor thee for thy ways.
And wouldst in holiness spend all thy days;
And here be entertained; or thou wilt find
To entertain thee here are none inclin'd.[6]


VII.

OF THE GOVERNORS OF THIS HOUSE.

The governors that here in office are,
Such be as service do with love and care;
Not swerving from the rule, nor yet intrude
Upon each other's work, nor are they rude
In managing their own: but to their trust
They labour to be honest, faithful, just.
1. The chief is he who is the Lord of all,
The Saviour; some him physician call.
He's cloth'd in shining raiment to the ground,
A golden girdle doth begirt him round;
His head and hairs are white as any snow,
His eyes are like a flame of fire also;
His feet are like fine brass, as if they burn'd
Within a furnace, or to fire were turn'd;
His voice doth like to many waters sound;
In his right hand, seven glittering stars are found.
Out of his mouth goes a two-edged sword,
Sharper than any ('tis his holy word)

And for his countenance, 'tis as the sun
Which shineth in its strength, till day is done.
His name is call'd holy, The WORD OF GOD;
The wine-press of his father's wrath he trod;
At all the power of sin he doth deride,
The keys of hell and death hang at his side.
This is our governor, this is the chief,
From this physician comes our soul's relief.
He is the tree of life and hidden manna;
'Tis he to whom the children sing hosanna.
The white stone he doth give with a new name;
In heaven and earth he is of worthy fame.
This man hath death destroy'd and slain the devil,
And doth secure all his from damning evil.
He is the prince of life, the prince of peace;
He doth us from the bonds of death release.
His work is properly his own; nor may,
In what he doth, another say him nay.

'Tis he who pays our hospitalian scores,
He's here to search, supple, and bind up sores;
He is our plaster-maker, he applies
Them to our wounds, he wipes our wetted eyes.
'Tis he that gives us cups of consolation,
'Tis he renews the hopes of our salvation.
He'll take our parts, oft times to us unknown,
And make as if our failings were his own;
He'll plead with God his name and doings too,
And save us will, from those would us undo.

His name is as an ointment poured forth;
'Tis sweet from east to west, from south to north.
He's white and ruddy; yea of all the chief;
His golden head is rich beyond belief.
His eyes are like the doves which waters wet,
Well wash'd with milk, and also fitly set,
His cheeks as beds of spices, and sweet flowers.
He us'd to water with those crystal showers,
Which often flowed from his cloudy eyes;
Better by far than what comes from the skies.
His lips like lilies, drop sweet-smelling myrrh,
Scenting as do those of the comforter.
His hands are as gold rings set with the beryls;
By them we are delivered out of perils;
His legs like marble, stand in boots of gold,
His countenance is ex'lent to behold.
His mouth, it is of all a mouth most sweet,
O kiss me then, Lord, every time we meet!
Thy sugar'd lips, Lord, let them sweeten mine,
With the most blessed scent of things divine.

2. This is one Governor; and next in place,
One call'd the Ghost, in Honour and in Grace
No whit inferior to him; and HE
Will also in this house our helper be,
He 'twas who did at first brood the creation;
And he's the cause of man's regeneration.
'Tis he by whom the heavens were garnished,
With all their host they then abroad did spread
(Like spangles, pearls, diamonds or richest gems)
Far richer than the fairest diadems.
'Twas he who with his cloven tongues of fire
Made all those wise ones of the world admire,
Who heard his breathing in unlearned men.
O blessed ruler! now the same as then!
His work our mind is to illuminate
With things divine, and to accommodate
Us with those graces, which will us adorn,
And make us look like men indeed new-born.
For our inheritance he makes us meet;
He makes us also in this world discreet.
Prudent and wise in what we take in hand,
To do and suffer at our Lord's command.
'Tis he that leads us to the tomb and cross,
Where Jesus crucified and buried was;
He shews us also, that he did revive,
And doth assure us that he is alive;
And doth improve the merit of his blood,
At grace's throne for our eternal good.
Dark riddles he doth here to us unfold,
Yea, makes us things invisible behold.
He sheds abroad God's love in every heart,
Where he doth dwell, yea to them doth impart,
Such tokens of a future happiness,
That's past the tongue of angels to express.
'Tis he which helpeth us, that to perform,
Whether becalm'd, or whether in a storm,
Which God commands: without him we do nought
That's good, either in deed, or word, or thought.

'Tis he that doth with jewels us bedeck,
'Tis he puts chains of gold about our neck;
'Tis he that doth us with fine linen gird,
That maketh us ofttimes live as a bird.
That cureth us of all our doubts and fears,
Puts bracelets on our hands, rings on our ears;
He sanctifies our persons, he perfumes
Our spirits also; he our lust consumes;
Our stinking breath he sweetens, so that we
To God and all good men sweet-scented be;
He sets God's mark upon us, and doth seal
Us unto life, and life to us reveal.


VIII.

UNDER OFFICERS.

3. Another sort of officers here are,
But such as must not with these first compare;
They're under-officers, but serviceable,
Not only here to rule, but wait at table.
Those clothed are with linen, fine and white,
They glitter as the stars of darksome night.
They have Saint Peter's keys, and Aaron's rod;
They ope and shut, they bind and loose for God.
The chief of these are watchmen, they have power
To mount on high and to ascend the tower
Of this brave fabric, and from thence to see
Who keeps their ground, and who the stragglers be.
These have their trumpet, when they do it sound
The mountains echo, yea it shakes the ground.
With it they also sound out an alarm,
When they perceive the least mischief or harm
Is coming, so they do this house secure
There from, or else prepare it to endure
Most manfully the cross, and so attain
The crown which for the victor doth remain.

This officer is call'd a steward too,
'Cause with his master's cash he has to do,
And has authority it to disburse
To those that want, or for that treasure thirst.
The distributor of the word of grace
He is, and at his mouth, when he's in place,
They seek the law, he also bids them do it;
He shews them sin, and learns them to eschew it.
By this example too he shews them how
To keep their garments clean, their knees to bow
Before the king, when he comes into place;
And when they do him supplicate for grace.

Another bade this officer doth wear,
Is that of overseer; because the care
Of the whole house is with him, he's to see
They nothing want, nor yet abused be
By false intruders, doctrines, or (perchance)
By the misplacing of an ordinance.[7]
These also are to see they wander not
From place or duty, lest they get a blot
To their profession, or bring some disease
Upon the whole, or get a trick to lease,
Or lie unto their God, by doing what
By sacred statutes he commanded not.
Call them your cooks, they're skill'd in dressing food
To nourish weak, and strong, and cleanse the blood:
They've milk for babes, strong meat for men of age;
Food fit for who are simple, who are sage,
When the great pot goes on, as oft it doth,
They put not coloquintida[8] in broth,
As do those younglings, fondlings of their skill,
Who make not what's so apt to cure as kill.

They are your sub-physicians, and know
What sickness you are incident unto;
Let them but feel your pulse, and they will tell
You quickly whether you are sick or well.
Have you the staggers? They can help you there;
Or if the falling-sickness, or do fear
A lethargy, a fever, or the gout,
God blessing of their skill, you need not doubt
A cure, for long experience has made
These officers the masters of their trade.[9]
Their physic works by purge and vomit too,
Fear not, nor full nor fasting but 'twill do,
Have but a care, and see you catch no cold,
And with their physic then you may be bold.

You may them Prophets call, for they can tell
Of things to come, yea, here they do excel.
They prophesy of man's future event,
Whether to weal or woe his mind is bent,
Yea, so expert are they in their predictions,
Their arguments so full are of convictions,
That none who hear them, but are forced to say,
Woe unto them who wander from the way.
Art bound for hell against all wind and weather?
Or art thou one a going backward thither?
Or dost thou wink, because thou would'st not see?
Or dost thou sideling go, and would'st not be
Suspected? Yet these prophets can thee tell,
Which way thou art a going down to hell.
For him that would eternal life attain,
Yet will not part with all, that life to gain,
But keepeth some thing close, he should forsake,
Or slips the time, in which he should awake;
Or saith he lets go all, yet keepeth some
Of what will make him lose the world to come.
These prophets can tell such a man his state,
And what at last will surely be his fate.
If thou art one who tradeth in both ways,
God's now, the devil's then; or if delays
Thou mak'st of coming to thy God for life;
Or if thy light, and lusts are at a strife
About who should be master of thy soul,
And lovest one, the other dost control;
These prophets tell thee can, which way thou bendest,
On which thou frown'st, to which a hand thou lendest.
Art one of those whose fears do go beyond
Their faith? when thou should'st hope, dost thou despond?
Dost keep thine eye upon what thou hast done,
And yet hast licence to look on the sun?
Dost thou so covet more, as not to be
Affected with the grace bestowed on thee?
Art like to him, that needs must step a mile
At every stride, or think it not worth while
To follow Christ? These prophets they can tell
To cure this thy disease, and make thee well.

This officer is also call'd a guide,
Nor should the people but keep by his side;
Or tread his steps in all the paths they walk,
By his example they should do and talk.
He is to be to them instead of eyes,
He must before them go in any wise;
And he must lead them by the water side,
This is the work of this our Faithful Guide.
Since snares, and traps, and gins are for us set,
Since here's a hole, and there is spread a net,
O let no body at my muse deride,
No man can travel here without a guide.
Here's tempting apples, here are baited hooks,
With turning, twisting, cramping, tangling crooks
Close by the way; woe then to them betide,
That dare to venture here without a guide.
Here haunt the fairies with their chanting voice;
Fiends like to angels, to bewitch our choices;
Baits for the flesh lie here on every side:
Who dares set here one foot without a guide
Master delusion dwelleth by our walks,
Who with confusion, sings and prays and talks;
He says the straight path's his, and ours the wide:
What then can we do here without a guide
Let God then give our leaders always eyes;
Yea, let him make them holy, bold, and wise;
And help us fast by them for to abide,
And suffer not the blind to be our guide.[10]

4. Here are of rulers, yet another sort,
Such as direct our manners to comport
With our professed faith, that we to view,
May let beholders know that we are new.
These are our conversations to inspect,
And us in our employments to direct,
That we in faith and love do every thing,
That reacheth from the peasant to the king.
That there may be no scandal in our ways,
Nor yet in our profession all our days.
These should after our busy-bodies look,
Tale-bearers also, they have undertook
To keep in order, also they must see
None that can work among us idle be;
Jars, discords, frauds, with grievances and wrongs,
These they're to regulate; to them belongs
The judgment of all matters of this kind,
And happy is the house thus disciplined.

5. Another sort of officers we have,
Deacons we call them 'cause their work's to save
And distribute those crumbs of charity
Unto the poor, for their subsistency,
That contributed is for their relief,
Which of their bus'ness is indeed the chief.
These must be grave, not of a double tongue,
Not given to wine, not apt to do a wrong
Unto the poor, through love to lucre. (Just
In this their office, faithful to their trust)
The wife must answer here as face doth face;
The husband's fitness to his work and place,
That ground of scandal or of jealousy
Obstructs not proof that he most zealously
Performs his office well, for then shall he
Be bold in faith, and get a good degree
Of credit with the church; yea what is more,
He shall possess the blessings of the poor.
His wisdom teach him will, to find out who
Is poor of idleness, and who comes to
A low estate by sickness, age, or 'cause
The want of limbs, or sight, or work it was
That brought them to it; or such destiny
As sometimes maketh low, who once were high.
They must remember too, that some there are
Who halt before they're lame, while others care
Not to make known their want, they'll rather die,
Than charge the churches with their poverty.
This done, they must bestow as they see cause;
Making the word the rule, and want the laws
By which they act, and then they need not pause.
The table of the Lord, he also must
Provide for, 'tis his duty and his trust.
The teacher too should have his table spread
By him; thus should his house be clad and fed;
Thus he serves tables with the church's stock,
And so becomes a blessing to the flock.[11]

I read of widows also that should be
Employed here for further decency;
I dare not say they are in office, though
A service here they are appointed to:
They must be very aged, trusty, meek,
Such who have done much good, that do not seek
Themselves; they must be humble, pitiful,
Or they will make their service void and null.
These are to teach the younger women what
Is proper to their sex and state, what not:
To be discreet, keepers at home, and chaste;
To love their husbands, to be good; shamefac'd:
Children to bear, to love them, and to fly
What to the gospel would be infamy.
I think those to the sick should look also,
A work unfit for younger ones to do.
Wherefore he saith, The younger ones refuse;
Perhaps because their weakness would abuse
Them, and subject them unto great disgrace,
When such a one as Amnon is in place.
And since the good old woman this must do
'Tis fit she should be fed and clothed too,
Out of the deacon's purse, let it so be;
And let this be her service constantly.[12]


IX.

THE ORDER AND MANNER OF THE GOVERNMENT HERE.

As I have shew'd you who in office are,
So I will tell you how, and with what care
Those here intrusted with the government,
Keep to the statutes made to that intent.
By rules divine this house is governed;
Not sanguinary ones, nor taught nor fed
By human precepts: for the scripture saith,
The word's our ghostly food; food for our faith.
Nor are all forced to the same degree
In things divine, tho' all exhorted be
To the most absolute proficiency
That law or duty can to them descry.

Alas! here's children, here are great with young;
Here are the sick and weak, as well as strong.
Here are the cedar, shrub, and bruised reed;
Yea, here are such who wounded are, and bleed.
As here are some who in their grammar be,
So here are others in their A, B, C.
Some apt to teach, and others hard to learn;
Some see far off, others can scarce discern
That which is set before them in the glass;
Others forgetful are, and so let pass,
Or slip out of their mind what they did hear
But now; so great our differences appear
Wherefore our Jacob's must have special care
They drive their flocks, but as their flocks can bear;
For if they be o'erdriven, presently
They will be sick, or cast their young, or die.
The laws therefore are more and less of force,
According as they bring us to the source,
Or head, or fountain, or are more remote
To what at first we should ourselves devote.
Be we then wise in handling of the laws,
Not making a confused noise like daws
In chambers, yea let us seek to excel,
To each man's profit; this is ruling well.
With fundamentals then let us begin,
For they strike at the very root of sin.
So the foundation being strongly laid,
Let us go on, as the wise builder said,
For I don't mean, we should at all disdain
Those that are less, we always should maintain
That due respect to either which is meet;
This is the way to sit at Jesus' feet.

Repent I must, or I am cast away;
Believe I must, or nothing I obey:
Love God I must, or nothing I can do,
That's worth so much as loosing of my shoe.
If I do not, bear after Christ, my cross;
If love to holiness is at a loss;
If I my lusts seek not to mortify;
If to myself, my flesh, I do not die;
What law, should I observe't, can do me good?
In little duties life hath never stood.

One reads, he prays, he catechises too;
But doth he nothing else, what doth he do?
I read to know my duty, I do pray
To God to help me do it day by day;
If this be not my end in what I do,
I am a sot, an hypocrite also.
I am baptiz'd, what then? unless I die
To sin, I cover folly with a lie.
At the Lord's table, I do eat; what though?
There some have eat their own damnation too.

I will suppose, I hear, I sing, I pray,
And that I am baptiz'd without delay,
I will suppose I do much knowledge get,
And will also suppose that I am fit
To be a preacher, yet nought profits me
If to the first, poor I a stranger be:
They are more weighty therefore; in compare
These unto them, but mint and anise are.

Not that I would the least of duty slight,
Because the least command, of divine right,
Requires that I myself subject thereto;
Willful resisters do themselves undo.
But let's keep order, let the first be first;
Repent, believe, and love; and then I trust
I have that right, which is divine, to all
That is enjoined; be they great or small.
Only I must as cautionary speak,
In one word more, a little to the weak;
Thou must not suffer men so to enclose
Thee in their judgments, as to discompose
Thee in that faith and peace thou hast with him;
This would be like the losing of a limb;
Or like to him who thinks he doth not well,
Unless he lose the kernel for the shell.
Thou art no captive, but a child and free;
Thou wast not made for laws, but laws for thee;
And thou must use them as thy light will bear it;
They that say otherwise, do rend and tear it,
More like to wicked tyrants, who are cruel,
And add unto a little fire, more fuel.
But those who are true shepherds of the sheep,
To quench such burnings would most gladly weep.
But I am yet but upon generals;
Particulars our legislator calls
For at our hands, and that in order to
Consummate what we have begun to do.

1. My brother I must love, in very deed.
I'm taught of God to do it: let me heed
This divine duty, and perform it well,
Who loves his brother, God in him doth dwell;
The argument which on me this imposes,
Smells like to ointment, or the sweetest roses.
Shall God love, shall he keep his faith to me?
And shall not I? shall I unfaithful be?
Shall God love me a sinner? and shall I
Not love a saint? Yea, shall my Jesus die
To reconcile me to my God? and shall
I hate his child, nor hear his wants that call
For my little assisting of him? fie
On such a spirit, on such cruelty;
Fie on the thought that would me alienate,
Or tempt me my worst enemy to hate.[13]

2. He that dwells here, must also be a sharer
In others' griefs; must be a burden-bearer
Among his brethren, or he cannot do
That which the blessed gospel calls him to.
In order hereunto, humility
Must be put on, it is our livery,
We must be clothed with it, if we will
The law obey, our master's mind fulfil.
If this be so, then what should they do here,
Who in their antic pranks of pride appear?
Let lofty men among you bear no sway,
The Lord beholds the proud man far away.
It is not fit that he inhabit there
Where humbleness of mind should have the chair.
Can pride be where a soul for mercy craves?
Shall pride be found among redeemed slaves?
Shall he who mercy from the gallows brought,
Look high, or strut, or entertain a thought
That tends to tempt him to forget that fate,
To which for sin he destin'd was of late,
And could not then at all delivered be,
But by another's death and misery?
Pride is the unbecoming'st thing of all:
Besides, 'tis the forerunner of a fall.
He that is proud, soon in the dirt will lie,
But honour followeth humility.
Let each then count his brother as his better,
Let each esteem himself another's debtor.
Christ bids us learn of him, humble to be,
Profession's beauty is humility.

3. Forgive, is here another statute law;
To be revenged is not worth a straw,
He that forgives shall also be forgiven,
Who doth not so, must lose his part in heaven;
Nor must thou weary of this duty be
'Cause God's not weary of forgiving thee.

Thou livest by forgiveness; should a stop
Be put thereto one moment, thou wouldst drop
Into the mouth of hell. Then let this move
Thee thy dear brother to forgive in love.

And we are bid in our forgivenesses
To do as God doth in forgiving his.
If any have a quarrel against any,
(As quarrels we have oft against a many)
Why then, as God, for Christ's sake, pardons you,
For Christ's sake, pardon thou thy brother too.
We say, What freely comes, doth freely go;
Then let all our forgivenesses be so.
I'm sure God heartily forgiveth thee,
My loving brother, prithee forgive me;
But then in thy forgiveness be upright;
Do't with thine heart, or thou'rt an hypocrite.

4. As we forgive, so we must watch and pray;
For enemies we have, that night and day,
Should we not watch, would soon our graces spoil,
Should we not pray, would our poor souls defile.
Without a watch, resist a foe who can?
Who prays not, is not like to play the man?
Complaint that he is overcome, he may;
But who would win the field, must watch and pray.
Who watches, should know who and who's together:
Know we not friends from foes, how know we whether
Of them to fight, or which to entertain?
Some have instead of foes, familiars slain.
Sometimes a lust will get into the place,
Or work, or office, of some worthy grace;
Till it has brought our souls to great decay.
Unless we diligently watch and pray,
Our pride will our humility precede:
By th' nose, our unbelief our faith will lead.
Self-love will be where self-denial should;
And passion heat, what patience sometime cool'd.
And thus it will be with us night and day,
Unless we diligently watch and pray.

Besides what these domestics do, there are
Abroad such foes as wait us to ensnare;
Yea, they against us stand in battle-'ray,
And will us spoil, unless we watch and pray.
There is the world with all its vanities,
There is the devil with a thousand lies;
There are false brethren with their fair collusions,
Also false doctrines with their strong delusions;
These will us take, yea carry us away
From what is good, unless we watch and pray.
Long life to many, is a fearful snare;
Of sudden death we also need beware;
The smiles and frowns of men, temptations be;
And there's a bait in all we hear and see.
Let them who can, to any shew a way,
How they should live, that cannot watch and pray.

Nor is't enough to keep all well within,
Nor yet to keep all out that would be sin,
If entertained; I must myself concern
With my dear brother, as I do discern
Him tempted, or a wand'ring from the way;
Else as I should, I do not watch and pray.
Pray then, and watch, be thou no drowsy sleeper,
Grudge, nor refuse, to be thy brother's keeper,
Seest thou thy brother's graces at an ebb?
Is his heel taken in the spider's web?
Pray for thy brother; if that will not do,
To him, and warn him of the present woe
That is upon him; if he shall thee hear
Thou wilt a saviour unto him appear.[14]

5. Sincerity, to that we are enjoined,
For I do in our blessed law-book find,
That duties, how well done soe'er they seem,
With our great God, are but of small esteem
If not sincerely done; then have a care
For hypocrites are hateful everywhere.
Things we may do, yea, and may let men see
Us do them too, design but honestly;
Vain-gloriously let us not seek for praise,
Vain-glory's nothing worth in gospel days.
Sincerity seeks not an open place,
To do, tho' it does all with open face;
It loves no guises, nor disfigurations.
'Tis plain, 'tis simple, hates equivocations.
Sincerity's that grace by which we poise,
And keep our duties even: nor but toys
Are all we do, if no sincerity
Attend our works, lift it up ne'er so high.
Sincerity makes heav'n upon us smile,
Lo, here's a man in whom there is no guile!
Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed!'
With duties he sincerely doth proceed;
Under the fig-tree heav'n saw him at prayer,
There is but few do their devotions there.
Sincerity! Grace is thereto entailed,
The man that was sincere, God never fail'd.
One tear that falleth from sincerity,
Is worth ten thousand from hypocrisy.

6. Meekness is also here imposed by law,
A froward spirit is not worth a straw.
A froward spirit is a bane to rest,
They find it so, who lodge it in their breast.
A froward spirit suits with self-denial,
With taking up the cross, and ev'ry trial,
As cats and dogs, together by the ears;
As scornful men do suit with frumps[15] and jeers.
Meek as a lamb, mute as a fish, is brave,
When anger boils, and passions vent do crave.
The meek, God will in paths of judgment guide;
Good shall the meek eat, and be satisfied;
The Lord will lift the meek to highest station;
Will beautify the meek with his salvation.
The meek are blest, the earth they shall inherit:
The meek is better than the proud in spirit.
Meekness will make you quiet, hardy, strong,
To bear a burden, and to put up wrong.
Meekness, though divers troubles you are in,
Will bridle passion, be a curb to sin.
Thus God sets forth the meek before our eyes;
A meek and quiet spirit God doth prize.

7. Temp'rance also, is on this house imposed,
And whoso has it not, is greatly nosed[16]
By standers by, for greedy, lustful men:
Nor can all we can say, excuse us, when
Intemp'rance any where to them shall be
Apparent; though we other vices flee.
Temperance, the mother is of moderation,
The beauty also of our conversation.
Temperance will our affections moderate,
And keep us from being inordinate
In our embraces, or in our salutes
Of what we have, also in our pursuits
Of more, and in a sedate settlement
Of mind, will make's in all states be content.
Nor want we here an argument to prove
That who, inordinate is, in his love
Of worldly things, doth better things defy,
And slight salvation for the butterfly.

What argument can any man produce,
Why we should be intemperate in the use
Of any worldly good? Do we not see
That all these things from us a fleeting be?
What can we hold? What can we keep from flying
From us? Is not each thing we have a dying?
My house, my wife, my child, they all grow old,
Nor am I e'er the younger for my gold;
Here's none abiding, all things fade away,
Poor I at best am but a clod of clay.

If that be true, man doth not live by bread,
He that has nothing else, must needs be dead;
Take bread for what can in this world be found,
Yet all that therein is, is but a sound,
An empty sound, there is no life at all,
It cannot save a sparrow from her fall.
Let us then use this world as we are bid,
And as in olden times, the godly did.
Who buy, should be as if they did possess
None of their purchase, or themselves did bless
In what they have; and he that doth rejoice
In what he hath, should rather out of choice,
Withdraw his mind from what he hath below,
And set his heart on whither he must go.
For those that weep under their heavy crosses,
Or that are broken with the sense of losses,
Let them remember, all things here are fading,
And as to nature, of a self-degrading
And wasting temper; yea, both we and they
Shall waste, and waste, until we waste away.
Let temperance then, with moderation be
As bounds to our affections, when we see,
Or feel, or taste, or any ways enjoy
Things pleasing to the flesh, lest we destroy
Ourselves therewith, or bring ourselves thereby
To surfeits, guilt, or Satan's slavery.

8. Patience, another duty, as we find
In holy writ, is on this house enjoined;
Her state, while here, is such, that she must have
This grace abounding in her, or a slave
She'll quickly be unto their lusts and will,
That seek the mind of Satan to fulfil.
He who must bear all wrongs without resistance,
And that with gladness too, must have assistance
Continually from patience, thereunto,
Or he will find such work too hard to do.
Who meets with taunts, with mocks, with flouts and squibs,
With raileries, reproaches, checks, and snibs;
Yea, he who for well-doing is abused,
Robb'd, spoiled, and goal'd, and ev'ry way misused;
Has he not patience soon will be offended,
Yea his profession too will soon be ended.
A Christian for religion must not fight,
But put up wrongs, though he be in the right;
He must be merciful, loving, and meek,
When they smite one, must turn the other cheek.
He must not render railing for reviling
Nor murmur when he sees himself a spoiling,
When they shall curse, he must be sure to bless,
And thus with patience must his soul possess.
I doubt our frampered[17] Christians will not down
With what I say, yet I dare pawn my gown,
Do but compare my notes with sacred story,
And you will find patience the way to glory.
Patience under the cross, a duty is,
Whoso possess it, belongs to bliss;
If it is present work accomplisheth;
If it holds out, and still abideth with
The Truth; then may we look for that reward,
Promised at the coming of the Lord.

9. To entertain good men let's not forget
Some by so doing have had benefit;
Yea for to recompense this act of theirs,
Angels have lodged with them unawares.
Yea to encourage such a work as this,
The Lord himself makes it a note of his,
When hungry or when thirsty I have been,
Or when a stranger, you did take me in.
Strangers should not to strangers but be kind
Specially if conferring notes, they find
Themselves, though strangers here, one brotherhood,
And heirs, joint heirs, of everlasting good;
These should as mother's sons, when they do meet
In a strange country, one another greet
With welcome; come in, brother, how dost do?
Whither art wand'ring? Prithee let me know
Thy state? Dost want or meat, or drink, or cloth?
Art weary? Let me wash thy feet, I'm loth
Thou shouldst depart, abide with me all night;
Pursue thy journey with the morning light.


X.

THE WAY OF REDUCING WHAT'S AMISS, INTO ORDER HERE.

Although this house thus honourable is,
Yet 'tis not sinless, many things amiss
Do happen here, wherefore them to redress,
We must keep to our rules of righteousness;
Nor must we think it strange, if sin shall be
Where virtue is; don't all men plainly see
That in the holy temple there was dust,
That to our very gold, there cleaveth rust?
In Abraham's family was a derider
I' th' palace of a king will be the spider.
Who saith, we have no sin, doth also say
We have no need at all to watch and pray;
To live by faith, the flesh to mortify,
Or of more of the spirit to sanctify
Our nature. All this wholly needless is
With him, who as to this, has nought amiss.
But we confess, 'cause we would not be liars,
That we still feel the motions and desires
Of sin within us, and should fall away,
Did not Christ intercede and for us pray.
We therefore do conclude that sin is here,
But that it may not to our shame appear,
We have our rules, thereby with it to deal,
And plaisters too, our deadly wounds to heal.
And seeing idleness gives great occasions
To th' flesh, to make its rude and bold invasions
Upon good orders, 'tis ordained we see,
That none dwell here, but such as workers be:
So plain's the law for this, and so complete,
It bids who will not work, forbear to eat;
Let then each one be diligent to do
What grace or nature doth oblige them to.
Who have no need to work for meat or clothes,
Should work for those that want. Not that the sloth
Of idleness should be encouraged,
But that those, poor indeed, be clad and fed.
Dorcas did thus, and 'tis to sacred story
Committed for her praise and lasting glory.

This house then is no nurse to idleness;
Fig-trees are here to keep, and vines to dress;
Here's work for all; yea, work that must be done;
Yet work, like that, to playing in the sun;
The toil's a pleasure, and the labour sweet,
Like that of David's dancing in the street;
The work is short, the wages are for ever,
The work like me, the wages like the giver

No drone must hide himself under those eaves;
Who sows not, will in harvest reap no sheaves.
The slothful man himself, may plainly see,
That honey's gotten by the working bee.
But here's no work for life, that's freely given;
Meat, drink, and cloths, and life, we have from heav'n;
Work's here enjoined, 'cause it is a pleasure,
Vice to suppress, and augment heavenly treasure
Moreover, 'tis to shew, if men profess
The faith, and yet abide in idleness,
Their faith is vain, no man can ever prove
He's right, but by the faith that works by love.
If this good counsel is by thee rejected;
If work and labour is by thee neglected;
If thou, like David, lollest on thy bed;
Or art like to a horse, pamper'd and fed
With what will fire thy lusts, and so lay snares
For thine own soul, when thou shalt be i' th' wars:
Then take what follows, sin must be detected,
And thou without repentance quite rejected.

This is the house of God, his dwelling-place,
'Tis here that we behold his lovely face;
But if it should polluted be with sin,
And so abide, he quickly will begin
To leave it desolate, and then woe to it,
Sin and his absence quickly will undo it.

And since sin is, of things the worst of all,
And watcheth like a serpent on a wall,
Or flyeth like an eagle in the air,
Or runs as desperate ships, void of all care,
Or, (as great Solomon hath wisely said)
Is as the way of wantons with a maid,
Who tick, and toy, and with a tempting giggle
Provoke to lust, and by degrees, so wriggle
Them into their affections, that they go
The way to death, so do themselves undo:
As it is said, this mischief to prevent,
Let all men watch, yea, and be diligent
Observers of its motions, and then fly,
This is the way to live, and not to die.
He that would never fall, must never slip,
Who would obey the call, must fear the whip.
God would also that every stander by
That in the grass doth see the adder lie,
Should cry as he did, death is in the pot,
That many by its poison perish not.
But if that beastly thing shall hold its hold,
And make the man possessed basely bold
In pleading for it, or shall it deny,
Or it shall seek to cover with a lie;
Then take more aid, and make a fresh assault
At it again, diminish not the fault,
But charge it home. If yet he will not fear,
But still unto his wickedness adhere,
Then tell the house thereof. But if he still
Persist in his abomination will,
Then fly him, 'cause he is a leprous man,
Count him with heathens and the publican.
But if he falls before thee at the first,
Then be thou to him faithful, loving, just.
Forgive his sin, tell it not to a brother,
Lest thou thyself be served so by another.

If he falls not, but in the second charge,
Spread not his wickedness abroad at large.
But, if thou think his sorrow to be sound,
Forgive his sin, and hide it under ground.
If he shall stand the first and second shot;
If he before the church, repenteth not,
Deal with him as the matter shall require,
Let not the house for him be set on fire.
If after all, he shall repent and turn
To God, and you, you must not let him burn
For ever under sense of sin and shame,
You must his sin forgive in Christ his name.

Confirm your love to him in Christ, you must,
By all such ways as honest are, and just.
Shy be not of him, carry't not aloof,
But rather give him of your love such proof,
That he may gather thence, ye do believe
To mercy Christ again doth him receive.

Two things, monish you, as to this, I would;
The first, to shew the church wherein she should
In all her actions so herself behave,
As to convince the fault, she would save
His soul; and that 'tis for this very thing,
She doth him unto open judgment bring.
Then would I shew the person they reject,
What will, without repentance, be th' effect
Of this tremendous censure, so conclude;
Leaving my judgment to the multitude
Of those who sober and judicious be,
Begging of each of them a prayer for me.

1. This house, in order to this work, must be
Affected with the sin and misery,
Of this poor creature, yea, must mourn and weep,
To think such tares, in your neglect, or sleep,
Should spring up here, nor must they once invent
To think, till he's cast out, you're innocent.

2. Thus leaven, the whole lump has leavened;
Israel was guilty of what Achan did;
And so must stand, until they purged are,
Till Achan doth, for sin, his burden bear.
The reason is, Achan a member was
Of that great body, and by nature's laws,
The hand, foot, eye, tongue, ear, or one of these,
May taint the whole with Achan's foul disease.
The church must too be sensible of this,
Some lep'rous stones make all the house amiss:
And as the stones must thence removed be,
In order to the house's sanctity,
So it must purged be (in any wise)
Before 'tis counted clean (by sacrifice).

3. Next have a care, lest sin, which you should purge
Becomes not unto you a farther scourge,
The which it will, if such shall judges be,
Which from its spots and freckles are not free;
Pluck thou the beam first out of thine own eye,
Else the condemned will thee vilify
And say, let not the pot the kettle judge;
If otherwise, it will beget a grudge,
A great one 'twixt the church and him that sinned,
Nor by such means, can ever such be winned
To a renew'd embrace of holiness;
More like be tempted further to transgress.

4. Again, let those that loud against it cry,
See they don't entertain it inwardly;
Sin, like to pitch, will to the fingers cleave,
Look to it then, let none himself deceive;
'Tis catching; make resistances afresh,
Abhor the garment spotted by the flesh.
Some at the dimness of the candle puff,
Who yet can daub their fingers with the snuff.

5. Beware, likewise, lest rancour should appear
Against the person, do in all things fear:
Bewail the man, while you abhor his sin;
Pity his soul; the flesh you still are in;
Thyself consider thou may'st tempted be,
Hast thou no pity, who will pity thee?

6. See that the ground be good on which you go:
Sin, but not virtue show dislike unto.
Take heed of hypocritical intentions,
And quarrel not at various apprehensions
About some smaller matter, lest it breed
Needless debates, and lest that filthy seed
Contention, should o'errun your holy ground,
And lest not love, but nettles there are found.

7. You must likewise allow each man his grains,
For that none perfect are, sin yet remains,
And human frailties do attend the best;
To bear and forbear here, will tend to rest.
Vain jangling, jars, and strifes will there abound,
Where moles are mountains made, or fault is found,
With every little, trivial, petty thing;
This spirit snib, or 'twill much mischief bring
Into this house, and 'tis for want of love,
'Tis entertain'd: it is not of the dove.

8. For those that have private opinions too
We must make room, or shall the church undo:
Provided they be such as don't impair
Faith, holiness, nor with good conscience jar:
Provided also those that hold them shall
Such faith hold to themselves, and not let fall
Their fruitless notions in their brother's way,
Do this, and faith and love will not decay.

9. We must also in these our dealings shew
We put a difference 'twixt those sins that do
Clash with the light of nature, and what we
Perceive against the faith of Christ to be.
Those against nature, nature will detect;
Those against faith, faith from them must direct
The judgment, conscience, understanding too,
Or there will be no cure, whate'er you do.
When men are caught in immoralities,
Nature will start, the conscience will arise
To judgment; and if impudence doth recoil,
Yet guilt, and self-condemnings will embroil
The wretch concerned, in such unquietness
Or shame, as will induce him to confess
His fault, and pardon crave of God and man,
Such men with ease therefore we conquer can.

But 'tis not thus with such as swerve in faith
With them, who, as our wise Apostle saith,
Entangled are at unawares, with those
Cunning to trap, to snare, and to impose
By falsifyings, their prevarications:
No, these are slyly taken from their stations,
Unknown to nature; yea, in judgment they
Think they have well done to forsake the way.
Their understanding, and their judgment too
Doth like, or well approve of what they do.
These are, poor souls, beyond their art and skill,
Ta'en captive by the devil, at his will,
Here therefore you must patience exercise,
And suffer long, ye must not tyrannize
It over such, but must all meekness shew;
Still dropping of good doctrine as the dew,
Against their error; so its churlishness
You conquer will, and may their fault redress.

The reason why we must not exercise
That roughness here, as where conviction lies
In nature, is because those thus ensnared
Want nature's light and help to be repair'd.
A spirit hath them taken, they are gone,
Delusions supernat'ral they're on
The wing of; They are out o' th' reach of man
Nothing but God, and gospel reach them can.
Now since we cannot give these people eyes,
Nor regulate their judgment, wherein lies,
Our work with them, if not, as has been said,
In exercising patience. While display'd
The holy word before their faces is,
By which alone they must see what's amiss
With their poor souls, and so convert again,
To him with whom salvation doth remain.

Obj. But they are turbulent, they would confound
The truth, and all in their perdition drown'd.

Ans. If turbulent and mischievous they are,
Imposing their opinions without care
Who they offend, or do destroy thereby.
Then must the church deal with them presently,
Lest tainted be the whole with their delusion,
And brought into disorder and confusion.


XI.

THE PRESENT CONDITION OF THOSE THUS DEALT WITH.

The man that worthily rejected is,
And cast out of this house, his part in bliss
Is lost for ever, turns he not again,
True faith and holiness to entertain.
Nor is it boot, for who are thus cast out,
Themselves to flatter, or to go about
To shift the censure; nothing here will do,
Except a new conversion thou come to.
He that is bound on earth, is bound in heaven,
Nor is his loosing, but the sin forgiven;
Repentance too, forgiveness must precede,
Or thou must still abide among the dead.


XII.

AN EXPOSTULATION WITH SUCH TO RETURN.

O shame! Is't not a shame for men to be
For sin, spu'd out from good society!
For man enlightened to be so base!
To turn his back upon the God of grace!
For one who for his sins has mourn'd and cry'd,
To slight him, who for sin hath bled and died!
What fool would sell his part in paradise,
That has a soul, and that of such a price?
What parallel can suit with such so well,
As those, for sin cast down from heaven to hell!
But let me tell thee, here is aggravation;
The angels, though they did fall from their station
Had not the caution thou hast had; they fell;
This thou hast seen, and seeing, didst rebel.
One would a thought, the noise of this their fall,
A warning; yea, a warning, and a call,
Should unto thee have been, to have a care
Of falling too: O how then didst thou dare,
Since God did not spare them, thus to presume
To tempt him in his wrath, thee to consume.
Nor did the angels from a Jesus fall,
Redeemed they were not, from a state of thrall;
But thou! as one redeem'd, and that by blood,
Redemption hast despised; and the mud
Or mire of thine own filth again embracest:
A dying bleeding Jesus thou disgracest!
What wilt thou do? see's not how thou hast trod
Under thy foot, the very Son of God?
O fearful hand of God! And fearful will
Thy doom be, when his wrath thy soul shall kill.

Yea, with a signal these must hear their sin,
This dirty sow from mire has washed been,
Yet there did wallow, after wash'd she was;
So to procure a lust, obtain'd this loss.
O shame! is't not a shame for man to be,
So much averse to his felicity,
That none can make him leave to play the fool,
Till to the devil he be put to school,
To learn his own salvation to prize?
O fool! must now the devil make thee wise?
O sot! that will in wickedness remain,
Unless the devil drives thee back again.

Hast quite forgot how thou wast wont to pray,
And cry out for forgiveness night and day?
Or dost thou count they were but painted fears
Which from thine eyes did squeeze so many tears?
Remember man, thy prayers and tears will cry
Thee down to hell, for thine apostacy.
Who will not have what he has prayed for,
Must die the death, his prayer shall him abhor.
Hast thou forgotten that most solemn vow
Thou mad'st to God, when thou didst crave he bow
His ear unto thee would, and give thee grace,
And would thee also in his arms embrace?
That vow, I say, whereby thou then didst bind
Thyself to him, that now thy roving mind
Recoil against him should, and fling away
From him, and his commandments disobey.
What has he done? wherein has he offended?
Thou actest now, as if thou wast intended
To prove him guilty of unrighteousness,
Of breach of promise, or that from distress
He could, or would not save thee, or that thou
Hast found a better good than he; but how
Thou wilt come off, or how thou wilt excuse
Thyself, 'cause thou art gone, and did refuse
To wait upon him that consider well;
Thou art as yet alive, on this side hell.
Is't not a shame, a stinking shame to be
Cast forth God's vineyard as a barren tree?
To be thrown o'er the pales, and there to lie,
Or be pick'd up by th' next that passeth by?

Well, thou hast turn'd away, return again;
Bethink thyself, thy foot from sin refrain;
Hark! thou art call'd upon, stop not thine ear:
Return, backsliding children, come, draw near
Unto your God; repent, and he will heal
Your base backslidings, to you will reveal
That grace and peace which with him doth remain,
For them that turn away, and turn again.

Take with thee words, come to the throne of grace
There supplicate thy God, and seek his face;
Like to the prodigal, confess thy sin,
Tell him where, and how vicious thou hast been.
Suppose he shall against thee shut the door,
Knock thou the louder, and cry out the more;
What if he makes thee there to stand a while?
Or makes as if he would not reconcile
To thee again? Yet take thee no denial,
Count all such carriages but as a trial
Whether thou art in earnest in thy suit,
As one truly forlorn and destitute;
But hide thou nought of all that thou hast done,
Open thy bosom, make confession
Of all thy wickedness, tell every whit;
Hast thou a secret sin? don't cover it;
Confess, thyself judge, if thou wouldst not die;
Who doth himself judge, God doth justify.

To sin, and stand in't, is the highest evil;
This makes a man most like unto the devil;
This bids defiance unto God and grace;
This man resists him spitteth in his face,
Scorns at his justice, mocketh at his power,
Tempts him, provokes him, grieves him every hour:
When he ariseth, he will recompense
This sturdy rebel for his impenitence:
Be not incorrigible then, come back again,
There's hope, beg mercy while life doth remain.

Obj. But I fear I am lost and cast away,
Sentence is past, and who reverse it may?

Ans. The sentence past, admitteth or reprieve;
Yea, of a pardon, canst thou but believe.
TURN AGAIN SINNER, NEVER MAKE A DOUBT,
COME, THE LORD JESUS WILL NOT CAST THEE OUT.




FOOTNOTES:

1. 4to, London, 1642. In the editor's library.

2. 'That advance,' preferment, or progress towards perfection.--Ed.

3. 'Mo,' a usual contraction for more in former times, now
obsolete.--Ed.

4. Probably referring to the parable of the prodigal son, Luke
15.--Ed.

5. This may refer to the Levitical law, Exodus 21:28-36. The ox
that had gored any one to death, 'shall be surely stoned' without
possibility of escape, but the backslider or manslayer, although
he lie equally under the sentence of death, yet may escape to the
city of refuge.--Ed.

6. These stanzas afford an excellent illustration to the meaning
of Bunyan in his Pilgrim's Progress, where Christian, before the
cross, receives the roll or certificate--loses it for a season in
the arbour on the hill Difficulty, when loitering and sleeping on
his way to the Interpreter's house, but regains it by repentance
and prayers, and eventually, having crossed the river, gives it
in at the gate of the Celestial City, and is admitted.--Ed.

7. Bunyan considered that baptism is to follow belief, and that
christening a child was a misplacing the ordinance. So also with
he Lord's Supper--that it was to be a public showing forth the
death of the Saviour, and if administered in private, or with any
other view, it was misplaced.--Ed.

8. It is a rare thing for Bunyan to use a foreign word; but all
pious persons in his time were familiar with, and generally used,
the Puritan or Genevan Bible, vulgarly called the Breeches Bible,
an extremely valuable book; in the marginal notes of which, on this
passage is the following explanation, '"wilde gourdes," which the
apoticaries call coloquintida, and is most vehement and dangerous
in purging.'--Ed.

9. The university or college in which Bunyan so highly graduated,
is the only one where ministers can be instructed in this spiritual
physic. It is Christ's college or school, neither at Oxford
or Cambridge, but in the Bible. There, and there only, under the
teaching of the Holy Spirit, can the Christian bishop or under
shepherd receive instruction in the precious remedies against
Satan's devices, or in specifics to cure spiritual maladies.--Ed.

10. 'He had in his pocket A MAP of all ways leading to or from the
celestial city; wherefore he struck a light, for he never went
without his tinder box, and took a view of his book or map; which
bid him be careful, in that place, to turn to the right hand way.
And had he not here been careful to look in his map, they had, in
all probability, been smothered in the mud; for just before them,
and that in the cleanest way, was a pit, and none knows how deep,
full of nothing but mud, there made on purpose to destroy pilgrims
in. Then thought I with myself, who that goeth on pilgrimage, but
would have one of these maps about him, that he may look when he
is at a stand which is the way he must take.'--Pilgrim's Progress,
Part Second.

11. These hints to deacons are invaluable. They must have been
the result of long intimacy and enlightened watchfulness over the
conduct of the poor. To distinguish between the noisy beggar and
the unobtrusive sufferer--to administer relief in just proportions,
'the word the rule, and want the law,' in spite of all that influence
which is constantly brought to bear upon those who distribute any
common charity fund. It requires much of the fear of God in the
heart, and a solemn sense of responsibility at the great day.
The terms, 'crumbs of charity,' are beautifully expressive of the
general poverty of Christian churches.--Ed.

12. Bunyan's idea of this scriptural order of female deacons is
very striking, and worthy the solemn consideration of all Christian
churches. They are to be chosen from such as are 'widows indeed,
who trust in God, and continue in supplications and prayers night
and day,' 1 Timothy 5:5. They are to devote themselves to the
sick--to be patterns of good works--and, if needful, to be fed and
clothed at the expense of the church, verse 16. If to this were
added to examine and educate the children, they might be most
eminently useful.--Ed.

13. These instructions are like 'apples of gold in pictures of
silver.' Thrice happy are those churches whose members act
in conformity with these scriptural rules. But is there a member
who dares to violate them? Poor wretched creature, the Lord have
mercy on thee.--Ed.

14. Happy is that Christian, who, in obedience to his Lord's
command, is so humble as to seek out the brother who has offended
him; 'Go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone,' is
the divine command. Is it not at the peril of our souls wilfully
to violate this self-humiliating but imperative law?--Ed.

15. To 'frump,' to mock or browbeat.--Ed.

16. 'Greatly nosed,' taken by the nose, ridiculed.--Ed.

17. 'Frampered' or frampold, peevish, crossgrained, rugged; now
obsolete.--Ed.

***

JOHN BUNYAN ON THE TERMS OF COMMUNION AND FELLOWSHIP OF CHRISTIANS
AT THE TABLE OF THE LORD;

COMPRISING

I. HIS CONFESSION OF FAITH, AND REASON OF HIS PRACTICE;
II. DIFFERENCES ABOUT WATER BAPTISM NO BAR TO COMMUNION; AND III.
PEACEABLE PRINCIPLES AND TRUE[1]


ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

Reader, these are extraordinary productions that will well repay
an attentive perusal. It is the confession of faith of a Christian
who had suffered nearly twelve years' imprisonment, under persecution
for conscience sake. Shut up with his Bible, you have here the
result of a prayerful study of those holy oracles. It produced a
difference in practice from his fellow Christians of ALL denominations,
the reasons for which are added to this confession; with a defence
of his principles and practice, proving them to be peaceable
and true. In all this an unlettered man displays the acumen of a
thoroughly educated polemical theologian. The author was driven
to these publications to defend himself from the slanders which
were showered down upon him, by all parties, for nearly eighteen
years, and by the attempts which were made to take away his members,
injure the peace of his congregation, and alienate him from the
church to which he was tenderly attached. His first inquiry is,
Who are to be admitted to the Lord's table; and his reply is,
Those whom God has received: they have become his children, and
are entitled to sit at their Father's table: such only as have
examined themselves, and by their conduct lead the church to hope
that they have passed from death unto life. The practice of those
who admit ungodly persons because they have submitted to some
outward ceremonies, he severely condemns. The mixture of the church
and the world he deems to be spiritual adultery, the prolific
source of sin, and one of the causes of the deluge. The Lord's
table is scripturally fenced around: 'Be ye not unequally yoked
together with unbelievers'; 'what communion hath light with darkness;
Christ with Belial; the temple of God with idols? be ye separate,
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.' 'Receive ye
one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God, not
to doubtful disputations.' 'Withdraw from them that walk disorderly,
working not; but busy bodies; unless with quietness they work and
eat their own bread. If any are proud, doting about questions and
strifes of words, evil surmisings, perverse disputings, supposing
that gain is godliness; from such withdraw.' Bunyan rests all upon
the word,--the characters are described who are to be excluded
from the Lord's table; but in no instance is it upon record that
any one was excluded because he had not been baptized in water.
And who will dare to make any addition to holy writ?

The practice of making the mode in which water baptism was
administered a term of communion, existed among the Independents
long before Bunyan's time. Crosby, in his History of the Baptists,
makes some long extracts from a book entitled, 'The sin and
danger of admitting Anabaptists to continue in the congregational
churches, and the inconsistency of such a practice with
the principles of both.' In America, Cotton and the Independents
severely persecuted their Baptist brethren, even to deportation.
As the Baptists increased in numbers, they refused to admit any
to the Lord's table, even to occasional communion, who had not
been baptized in water upon a profession of faith: in fact, the
difference between those who consider baptism to be a relative
duty to be performed by parents in having their infants sprinkled,
and those who deem it a personal duty to be immersed in water,
as a public putting on of Christ, is so great, as to require the
utmost powers of charity to preserve peace. Thus it was in the
primitive churches, where great differences prevailed even as to
the duty of preaching the gospel to the Gentiles; the keeping of
days probably extending to the Jewish sabbath, and to the abstaining
from certain meats, with other ordinances of the Jewish law.

Bunyan saw all the difficulties of this question: he was satisfied
that baptism is a personal duty, in respect to which every individual
must be satisfied in his own mind, and over which no church had
any control; and that the only inquiry as to the fitness of a
candidate for church fellowship should be, whether the regenerating
powers of the Holy Ghost had baptized the spirit of the proposed
member into newness of life. This is the only livery by which a
Christian can be known. Bunyan very justly condemns the idea of
water baptism being either the Christian's livery or his marriage
to the Saviour.

We do well, in our examinations into this subject, to note
carefully the various applications of the word baptize, and not
always attach the use of water to the term. There is a being
baptized in a cloud, and in the sea, to protect God's Israel from
their deadly foes; a baptism in sufferings; a baptism in water
unto repentance; a baptism in fire, or the Holy Ghost; a baptism
into the doctrine of the Trinity (Matt 28:19). Bunyan had no doubt
upon this subject; he deemed water baptism an important personal
duty; and that a death to sin, and resurrection to newness of
life--a different tint, or dye, given to the character--was best
figured by immersion in water: still he left it to every individual
to be satisfied in his own mind as to this outward sign of the
invisible grace. 'Strange,' he says, 'take two Christians equal
on all points but this; nay, let one go far beyond the other for
grace and holiness; yet this circumstance of water shall drown and
sweep away all his excellencies; not counting him worthy of that
reception that with hand and heart shall be given to a novice in
religion, because he consents to water.'

For these catholic principles he was most roughly handled. Deune,
in a pamphlet in the Editor's possession, called him a devil; and
likened him to Timri, who slew his master. The most learned of
the Baptist ministers entered upon the controversy. They invited
him to a grand religious tournament, where he would have stood
one against a legion. A great meeting was appointed, in London,
for a public disputation--as was common among the puritans--and
in which the poor country mechanic was to be overwhelmed with
scholastic learning and violence; but Bunyan wisely avoided a
collision which could have answered no valuable purpose, and which
bid fair to excite angry feelings. He had appealed to the press
as the calmest and best mode of controversy; and to that mode of
appeal he adhered. Three learned men undertook the cause against
Bunyan: these were, D'Anvers, W. Kiffin, and T. Paul. When these
lettered, able, and distinguished disputants published their
joint answer, it contained much scurrilous abuse. Their brother,
Bunyan, was in prison, and they visited him with gall and wormwood.
He closes his reply with these remarkable words, 'Thine to serve
thee, Christians, so long as I can look out at those eyes that
have had so much dirt thrown at them by many.'

The late Mr. Robert Hall, in his controversy upon this subject
with Mr. Kinghorn, in which--having demolished Kinghorn's castle
in a few pages--he, in order to make a book, amused the public
by kicking the ruins about, thus adverts to these treatises: 'The
most virulent reproaches were cast upon the admirable Bunyan,
during his own time, for presuming to break the yoke; and whoever
impartially examines the spirit of Mr. Booth's Apology, will
perceive that its venerable author regards him, together with his
successors, much in the light of rebels and insurgents, or, to
use the mildest terms, as contumacious despisers of legitimate
authority.'[2]

We cannot have a more decided proof of Bunyan's great powers, and
of his being much in advance of his times, than by the opinions
of which he was the Christian pioneer having spread so extensively
through the Baptist denomination. In this his predictions were
fully verified. It is surprising that pious dissenters should ever
have made uniformity in outward ceremonies of more importance than
inward holiness, as a term of communion. Such sentiments naturally
attach to state churches; and ought to be found only with those
bodies which exist merely for political purposes, and for it
are rewarded with earthly power, pomp, and wealth. I close these
observations by quoting the words of Bunyan's learned antagonists,
published within a few years of this controversy, and during his
lifetime. his sentiments appear to have had a hallowed effect even
upon their minds, and produced an apology for their conduct. It
is in the appendix to the Baptist confession of faith, republished
in 1677: 'We would not be misconstrued, as if the discharge of
our consciences did any way disoblige or alienate our affections
or conversations from any others that fear the Lord: earnestly
desiring to approve ourselves to be such as follow after peace with
holiness. We continue our practice, not out of obstinacy, but we
do therein according to the best of our understandings, in that
method which we take to be most agreeable to the scriptures. The
christening of infants, we find by church history, to have been a
very ancient practice; still we leave every one to give an account
of himself to God. And if in any case debates between Christians
are not plainly determinable by the scriptures, we leave it to the
second coming of Christ.' In 1689, the year after Bunyan's death,
this appendix was omitted from the Baptist confession of faith.

May the time soon arrive when water shall not quench love, but
when all the churches militant shall form one army, with one
object,--that of extending the Redeemer's kingdom.--GEO. OFFOR.



A CONFESSION OF MY FAITH, AND A REASON OF MY PRACTICE; OR, WITH
WHO, AND WHO NOT, I CAN HOLD CHURCH FELLOWSHIP, OR THE COMMUNION
OF SAINTS.

SHEWING, BY DIVERSE ARGUMENTS, THAT THOUGH I DARE NOT COMMUNICATE
WITH THE OPENLY PROFANE, YET I CAN WITH THOSE VISIBLE SAINTS THAT
DIFFER ABOUT WATER-BAPTISM. WHEREIN IS ALSO DISCOURSED, WHETHER
THAT BE THE ENTERING ORDINANCE INTO FELLOWSHIP, OR NO.

'I believed, therefore have I spoken.'--Psalm 116:10


TO THE READER.

Sir,

I marvel not that both you and others do think my long imprisonment
strange, (or rather strangely of me for the sake of that) for
verily I should also have done it myself, had not the Holy Ghost
long since forbidden me (1 Peter 4:12; 1 John 3:13). Nay, verily,
that notwithstanding, had the adversary but fastened the supposition
of guilt upon me, my long trials might by this time have put
it beyond dispute; for I have not hitherto been so sordid, as
to stand to a doctrine right or wrong; much less when so weighty
an argument as above eleven years' imprisonment, is continually
dogging of me to weigh and pause, and pause again, the grounds and
foundation of those principles, for which I thus have suffered;[3]
but having not only at my trial asserted them, but also since, even
all this tedious tract of time, in cool blood, a thousand times,
by the word of God, examined them, and found them good; I cannot,
I dare not now revolt or deny the same, on pain of eternal damnation.

And that my principles and practice may be open to the view and
judgment of all men, though they stand and fall to none but the
word of God alone, I have in this small treatise presented to this
generation, 'A Confession of my Faith, and a Reason of my Practice
in the Worship of God'; by which, although it be brief, candid
Christians may, I hope, without a violation to faith or love,
judge [that] I may have the root of the matter found in me.

Neither have I in this relation abusively presented my reader,
with other doctrines or practices, than what I held, professed, and
preached when apprehended, and cast in prison. Nor did I then or
now retain a doctrine besides, or which is not thereon grounded.
The subject I should have preached upon, even then when the
constable came, was, 'Dost thou believe on the Son of God?' From
whence I intended to shew, the absolute need of faith in Jesus
Christ; and that it was also a thing of the highest concern for
men to inquire into, and to ask their own hearts whether they had
it or no.

Faith and holiness are my professed principles, with an endeavour,
so far as in me lieth, to be at peace with all men. What shall I
say, let mine enemies themselves be judges, if anything in these
following doctrines, or if ought that any man hath heard me preach,
doth [savour], or hath according to the true intent of my words,
savoured either of heresy or rebellion. I say again, let they
themselves be judges, if ought they find in my writing or preaching,
doth render me worthy of almost twelve years' imprisonment, or
one that deserveth to be hanged, or banished for ever, according
to their tremendous sentence. Indeed my principles are such, as
lead me to a denial to communicate in the things of the kingdom
of Christ, with the ungodly and openly profane; neither can I in
or by the superstitious inventions of this world, consent that my
soul should be governed in any of my approaches to God, because
commanded to the contrary, and commended for so refusing. Wherefore
excepting this one thing, for which I ought not to be rebuked;
I shall, I trust, in despite of slander and falsehood, discover
myself at all times a peaceable and an obedient subject. But
if nothing will do, unless I make of my conscience a continual
butchery, and slaughter-shop, unless putting out my own eyes, I
commit me to the blind to lead me, as I doubt is desired by some,
I have determined, the Almighty God being my help and shield, yet
to suffer, if frail life might continue so long, even till the
moss shall grow on mine eyebrows, rather than thus to violate my
faith and principles. 'Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon, which
cometh from the rock of the field? or shall the cold flowing waters
that come from another place be forsaken?' (Jer 18:14). 'Hath
a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods?' (Jer 2:11).
'For all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and
we will walk in the name of the LORD our God for ever and ever'
(Micah 4:5).

Touching my practice as to communion with visible saints, although
not baptized with water; I say it is my present judgment so to
do, and am willing to render a farther reason thereof, shall I
see the leading hand of God thereto.

Thine in bonds for the gospel,

JOHN BUNYAN.




A CONFESSION OF MY FAITH, AND A REASON OF MY PRACTICE, ETC.

'Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a
reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear: having
a good conscience; that whereas they speak evil of you, as
of evil-doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good
conversation in Christ.'--1 Peter 3:15, 16.

1. I believe, that there is but one only true God, and there is
none other but he. 'To us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things' (1 Cor 8:6). 'And this is life eternal, that
they might know thee the only true God' &c. (John 17:3, see also
Mark 12:32; Acts 17:24).

2. I believe, that this God is almighty, eternal, invisible,
incomprehensible, &c. 'I am the Almighty God; walk before me,
and be thou perfect' (Gen 17:1). 'The eternal God is thy refuge'
(Deut 33:27). 'Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible,
the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever' (1 Tim
1:17, see also Job 11:7; Rom 11:33).

3. I believe, that this God is unspeakably perfect in all his
attributes of power, wisdom, justice, truth, holiness, mercy, love,
&c. his power is said to be eternal (Rom 1:20), his understanding
and wisdom infinite (Psa 147:5); he is called the just Lord in
opposition to all things (Zeph 3:5). He is said to be truth itself
and the God thereof (2 Thess 2:10; Deut 32:4). There is none holy
as the Lord. 'God is love.' 'Canst thou by searching find out God?
canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?' (Job 11:7).

4. I believe, that in the Godhead, there are three persons or
subsistances. 'There are three that bear record in heaven: the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost' (1 John 5:7, see also Gen
1:26, 3:22, 11:7; Isa 6:8).

5. I believe, that these three are in nature, essence, and eternity,
equally one. 'These three are one' (1 John 5:7).

6. I believe, [that] there is 'a world to come' (Heb 2:5, 6:5).

7. I believe, that there shall be 'a resurrection of the dead, both
of the just and unjust' (Acts 24:15). 'Many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and
some to shame and everlasting contempt' (Dan 12:2). 'Marvel not
at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the
graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have
done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation' (John 5:28).

8. I believe, that they that 'shall be accounted worthy to obtain
that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor
are given in marriage: neither can they die any more: for they
are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being
the children of the resurrection' (Luke 20:34-36, see also John
10:27-29; Rev 7:16, 20:6).

9. I believe, that those that die impenitent, shall be tormented
with the devil and his angels, and shall be cast with them into
'the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone' (Rev 21:8). 'Where
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched' (Mark 9:43,48,
see also Matt 25:41,46; John 5:29).

10. I believe, that because God is naturally holy and just, even,
as he is good and merciful; therefore, all having sinned, none can
be saved, without the means of a redeemer. 'Then he is gracious
unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I
have found a ransom' (Job 33:24). 'We have redemption through his
blood, even the forgiveness of sins' (Col 1:14). For which 'without
shedding of blood, is no remission' (Heb 9:22).

11. I believe that Jesus Christ our Lord himself is the redeemer.
'They remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their
redeemer' (Psa 78:35). 'Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your
vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish,
and without spot' (1 Peter 1:18,19).

12. I believe, that the great reason why the Lord, the second person
in the Godhead, did clothe himself with our flesh and blood, was
that he might be capable of obtaining the redemption, that before
the world, was intended for us. 'Forasmuch then as the children
are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same; [mark] that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them
who through fear of death, were all their lifetime subject to
bondage' (Heb 2:14,15). 'When the fulness of time was come, God
sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem
them that were under the law' (Gal 4:4,5). 'Wherefore it behoved
him in all things to be made like unto his brethren, and that he
might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining
to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in
that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour
them that are tempted' (Heb 2:17,18). 'Christ hath redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it
is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree: That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through [faith in]
Jesus Christ' (Gal 3:13,14).

13. I believe, that the time when he clothed himself with our flesh,
was in the days of the reign of Caesar Augustus; then, I say, and
not till then, was the Word 'made flesh,' or clothed with our nature
(John 1:14; 1 Tim 3:16). 'And it came to pass in those days, that
there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world
should be taxed. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the
city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the city of David, which is
called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of
David:) To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with
child. And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered' (Luke 2:1,4-6). This
child was he of whom godly Simeon was told by the Holy Ghost,
when he said, That he should not see death until he had seen the
Lord's Christ (vv 25-27).

14. I believe, therefore, that this very child, as afore is
testified, is both God and man; the Christ of the living God. 'And
she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for
them in the inn. And there were in the same country shepherds--keeping
watch over their flock by night. And, lo, the angel of the Lord
came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them:
and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not:
for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall
be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of
David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a
sign unto you; ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes
lying in a manger' (Luke 2:7-12). Again, 'But while he thought
on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto
him;--saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto
thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the
Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call
his name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins. Now
all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of
the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with
child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name
Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us' (Matt 1:21,22).

15. I believe, therefore, that the righteousness, and redemption,
by which we that believe, stand just before God, as saved from
the curse of the law, is the righteousness, and redemption, that
consists in the personal acts and performances of this child
Jesus; this God-man the Lord's Christ: it consisteth, I say, in
his personal fulfilling the law for us, to the utmost requirement
of the justice of God. 'Think not [saith he] that I am come to
destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but
to fulfil' (Matt 5:17). By which means he became 'the end of the
law for righteousness to every one that believeth' (Rom 10:4).
'For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh' (Rom 8:3). So finishing
transgressions, and making an end of sins, and making reconciliation
for iniquity, He brought in everlasting righteousness (1 John 3:8;
2 Tim 1:9; Heb 10:5-10; Dan 9:24).

16. I believe, that for the completing of this work, he was always
sinless (Heb 4:15); did always the things that pleased God's
justice (John 8:29), that every one of his acts, both of doing
and suffering, and rising again from the dead, was really and
infinitely perfect, being done by him as God-man (Heb 7:26-28):
wherefore his acts before he died, are called, 'the righteousness
of God' (Rom 3:21,22), his blood, 'the blood of God' (Acts 20:28),
and 'hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his
life for us' (1 John 3:16). The Godhead which gave virtue to all
the acts of the human nature, was then in perfect union with it,
when he hanged upon the cross for our sins (Acts 10:36; John 20:28;
Rom 1:4).

17. I believe then, that the righteousness that saveth the sinner
from the wrath to come, is properly and personally Christ's, and
ours but as we have union with him; God by grace imputing it to us.
'Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness,
which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ,
the righteousness which is of God by faith' (Phil 3:8,9). 'But
of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption' (1 Cor
1:30). 'For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin;
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him' (2 Cor 5:21)
['IN the LORD have I righteousness and strength' (Isa 45:24).]

18. I believe, that God, as the reward of Christ's undertakings
for us, hath exalted him to his own right-hand, as our mediator,
and given him a name above every name; and hath made him Lord of
all, and judge of quick and dead: and all this that we who believe
might take courage to believe, and hope in God (Eph 1:17-22). 'And
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself--unto death,
even the death of the cross, [where he died for our sins]. Wherefore
God also hath highly exalted him; and given him a name--above every
name: That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; And that
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory
of God the Father' (Phil 2:8-11). 'And he commanded us to preach
unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained
of God to be the Judge of quick and dead' (Acts 10:42, 17:31).
'Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world,
but was manifest in these last times for you, who by him do believe
in God that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that
your faith and hope might be in God' (1 Peter 1:19-21).

19. I believe, that being at the right hand of God in heaven,
he doth there effectually exercise the offices of his excellent
priesthood, and mediatorship, presenting himself continually before
God, in the righteousness which is accomplished for us, when he
was in the world. For by the efficacy of his blood, he not only
went into the holy place, but being there, and having by it obtained
eternal redemption for us; now, as receiving the worth and merit
thereof from the Father; doth bestow upon us grace, repentance,
faith, and the remission of sins: yea he also received for us, the
Holy Ghost to be sent unto us, to ascertain[4] us of our adoption
and glory: 'For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest'
(Heb 8:4). 'Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is
passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our
profession' (Heb 4:14). 'For there is one God, and one mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus' (1 Tim 2:5). For 'by his
own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us.--For Christ is not entered into the
holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but
into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us'
(Heb 9:12,24). 'Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted,
and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost,
he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear' (Acts 2:23,
5:31).[5]

20. I believe, that being there, he shall so continue till the
restitution of all things, and then he shall come again in glory,
and shall sit in judgment upon all flesh. And I believe, that
according to his sentence so shall their judgment be. 'Repent ye
therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto
you: whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution
of all things,--spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since
the world began' (Acts 3:19-21). For 'this same Jesus, which is
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen him go into heave' (Acts 1:11). 'For the Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
archangel, and with the trump of God'; &c. (1 Thess 4:16). 'When
the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels
with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And
before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the
goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats
on the left. Then shall the king say unto them on his right hand,
Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world. Then shall he say also unto
them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: And these shall
go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life
eternal' (Matt 25:31-33,41,46). For 'the day of the Lord will come
as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat,
the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner
of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,
looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein
the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat' (2 Peter 3:10-12).

21. I believe that when he comes, his saints shall have a reward
of grace, for all their work and labour of love which they showed
to his name in the world. 'And every man shall receive his own
reward, according to his own labour' (1 Cor 3:8). 'And then shall
every man have praise of God' (4:5). 'And behold, I come quickly;
and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be' (Rev 22:12). 'Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye
stedfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the
Lord' (1 Cor 15:58). 'Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive
the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ' (Col
3:24).

How Christ is made ours; or by what means this or that man, hath
that benefit by him, as to stand just before God now, and in the
day of judgment.

Of Justification.

1. I believe, we being sinful creatures in ourselves, that no
good thing done by us, can procure of God the imputation of the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. But that the imputation thereof
is an act of grace, a free gift without our deserving. 'Being
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus' (Rom 3:24, 5:17). 'Who hath saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus'
(2 Tim 1:9).

2. I believe also, That the power of imputing righteousness
resideth only in God by Christ: 1. Sin being the transgression
of the law. 2. The soul that hath sinned being his creature, and
the righteousness also his, and his only. 'Even as David also
describeth the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputeth
righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin' (Rom 4:6-8). Hence
therefore it is said again, That men 'shall abundantly utter the
memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness'
(Psa 145:7). 'For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him
that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy' (Rom 9:15,16).

3. I believe, that the offer of this righteousness, as tendered
in the gospel, is to be received by faith; we still in the very
act of receiving it, judging ourselves sinners in ourselves. 'Oh
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? I thank God through Jesus Christ' (Rom 7:24,25). 'Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved' (Acts 16:31).
The gospel is preached in all nations for the obedience of faith.
'Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that
is in Christ Jesus; whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation,
[a sacrifice to appease the displeasure of God] through faith in
his blood. To declare his righteousness for the remission of sins
that are past through the forbearance of God; to declare I say,
at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the
justifier of him which believeth on Jesus' (Rom 3:24-26). 'Be it
known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: And by him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the law of Moses' (Acts 13:38,39).

4. I believe, that this faith, as it respecteth the imputation of
this righteousness, for justification before God, doth put forth
itself in such acts, as purely respect the offer of a gift. It
receiveth, accepteth of, embraceth, or trusteth to it. 'As many
as received him to them gave he power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name' (John 1:12). 'This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief' (1 Tim
1:15; Heb 11:13). 'In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard
the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: In whom also
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise' (Eph 1:13). I believe therefore, that as to my justification
from the curse of the law, I am, as I stand in myself, ungodly,
to receive, accept of, embrace, and trust to the righteousness,
that is already provided by, and wrapt up in the personal doings
and sufferings of Christ; it being faith in that, and that only,
that can justify a sinner in the sight of God.[6]

5. I believe, that the faith that so doth, is not to be found with
any but those, in whom the Spirit of God by mighty power doth work
it: all others being fearful and incredulous, dare not venture
their souls and eternity upon it. And hence it is called the faith
that is wrought by the exceeding great and mighty power of God;
the faith of the operation of God. And hence it is that others are
said to be fearful, and so unbelieving. These with other ungodly
sinners must have their part in the lake of fire (Eph 1:18,19;
Col 2:12; Eph 2:8; Phil 1:19; Rev 21:8).

6. I believe, that this faith is effectually wrought in none, but
those which before the world were appointed unto glory. 'And as
many as were ordained unto eternal life believed' (Acts 13:48).
'That he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels
of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory' (Rom 9:23). 'We
give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in
our prayers; remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and
labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in
the sight of God;--knowing, brethren beloved, your election of
God' (1 Thess 1:2-4). But of the rest he saith, 'ye believe not
because ye are not of my sheep, as I said' (John 10:26), which latter
words relate to the 16th verse, which respecteth the election of
God.

'Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again,
He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they
should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart,
and I should heal them' (John 12:39,40).

Of Election.

1. I believe that election is free and permanent, being founded
in grace, and the unchangeable will of God. 'Even so then at this
present time also there is a remnant according to the election
of grace. And if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise
grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more
of grace: otherwise work is no more work' (Rom 11:5,6). 'Nevertheless
the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord
knoweth them that are his' (2 Tim 2:19). 'In whom also we have
obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the
purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his
own will' (Eph 1:11).

2. I believe, that this decree, choice or election, was before
the foundation of the world; and so before the elect themselves,
had being in themselves: For 'God who quickeneth the dead, and
calleth those things which be not as though they were' (Rom 4:17),
stays not for the being of things, to determine his eternal purpose
by; but having all things present to him, in his wisdom, he made
his choice before the world was (Eph 1:4; 2 Tim 1:9).

3. I believe, that the decree of election is so far off from
making works in us foreseen, the ground or cause of the choice:
that it containeth in the bowels of it, not only the persons, but
the graces that accompany their salvation. And hence it is, that
it is said; we are predestinated 'to be conformed to the image of
his Son' (Rom 8:29); not because we are, but 'that we SHOULD be
holy and without blame before him in love' (Eph 1:4). 'For we are
his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God hath before ordained that we should walk in them' (Eph 2:10).
He blessed us according as he chose us in Christ. And hence it
is again that the salvation and calling of which we are now made
partakers, is no other than what was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began; according to his eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord (Eph 3:8-11; 2 Tim 1:9; Rom 8:29).

4. I believe that Christ Jesus is he in whom the elect are always
considered, and that without him there is neither election,
grace, nor salvation. 'Having predestinated us unto the adoption
of children, by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace:
wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according
to the riches of his grace.--That in the dispensation of the
fulness of times, he might gather together in one all things in
Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth, even
in him' (Eph 1:5-7,10). 'Neither is there salvation in any other:
for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby
we must be saved' (Acts 4:12).

5. I believe, that there is not any impediment attending the election
of God, that can hinder their conversion, and eternal salvation.
'Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom
he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them
he also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God
be for us, who can be against us?--Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that
condemneth?' &c. (Rom 8:30-35). 'What then? Israel hath not obtained
that which he seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it,
and the rest were blinded' (Rom 11:7). 'For Israel hath not been
forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the LORD of hosts: though their
land was filled with sin, against the holy one of Israel' (Jer
51:5). When Ananias made intercession against Saul, saying, 'Lord, I
have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy
saints at Jerusalem: and here he hath authority from the chief
priests to bind all that call on thy name.' What said God unto
him? 'Go thy way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my
name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel'
(Acts 9:12,15).

6. I believe that no man can know his election, but by his calling.
The vessels of mercy, which God afore prepared unto glory, do thus
claim a share therein: 'Even us, [say they,] whom he hath called,
not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles? As he saith also
in Hosea; I will call them my people, which were not my people,
and her beloved, which was not beloved' (Rom 9:24,25).

7. I believe therefore, that election doth not forestal or prevent
the means which are of God appointed to bring us to Christ, to
grace and glory; but rather putteth a necessity upon the use and
effect thereof; because they are chosen to be brought to heaven
that way: that is, by the faith of Jesus Christ, which is the
end of effectual calling. 'Wherefore the rather, brethren, give
diligence to make your calling and election sure' (2 Peter 1:10;
2 Thess 2:13; 1 Peter 1:12).

Of Calling.

I believe, that to effectual calling, the Holy Ghost must accompany
the word of the gospel, and that with mighty power: I mean that
calling, which of God is made to be the fruit of electing love.
'Knowing,' saith Paul to the Thessalonians, 'brethren beloved, your
election of God. For our gospel came not unto you in word only,
but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance,'
&c. (1 Thess 1:4,5). Otherwise men will not, cannot, hear and
turn. Samuel was called four times, before he knew the voice of
him that spake from heaven (1 Sam 3:-610). It is said of them in
Hosea, That as the prophets called them so they went from them;
and instead of turning to them, 'sacrificed to Baalim, and burned
incense to graven images' (Hosea 11:2). The reason is, because men
by nature are not only dead in sins, but enemies in their minds
by reason of wicked works: the call then is, 'Awake thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light' (Eph 5:14). Understand, therefore, that effectual calling
is like that word of Christ that raised Lazarus from the dead;
a word attended with an arm that was omnipotent. 'Lazarus, come
forth' (John 11:43). It was a word to the dead; but not only so:
it was a word for the dead; a word that raised him from the dead;
a word that outwent all opposition; and that brought him forth
of the grave, though bound hand and foot therein (Gal 1:15). And
hence it is, that calling is sometimes expressed by quickening
(Eph 2:1,2), awakening, illuminating, or bringing them forth of
darkness to light, that amazeth and astonisheth them (Heb 10:32;
Acts 9:6). For as it is a strange thing for a man that lay long
dead, or never saw the light with his eyes, to be raised out of
the grave, or to be made to see that which he could not so much
as once think of before, so it is with effectual calling. Hence it
is that Paul, when called, stood 'trembling and was astonished':
and that Peter saith, 'he hath called us out of darkness into his
marvellous light' (1 Peter 2:9; Eph 4:24; Acts 9:6). In effectual
calling the voice of God is heard, and the gates of heaven are
opened:[7] when God called Abraham, he appeared to him in glory.
That of Ananias to Saul is experienced but by few. 'The God of
our fathers hath chosen thee, [saith he,] that thou shouldest know
his will, and see that just one, and shouldest hear the voice of
his mouth' (Acts 22:14). True, Saul's call was out of the ordinary
way, but yet as to the matter, and truth of the work, it was no
other than all the chosen have, viz.

(1.) An effectual awakening about the evil of sin; and especially
of unbelief (John 16:9). And therefore when the Lord God called
Adam, he also made unto him an effectual discovery of sin; insomuch
that he stript him of all his righteousness (Gen 3). Thus he also
served the gaoler (Acts 16:29,30). Yea it is such an awakening, as
by it, he sees he was without Christ, without hope, and a stranger
to the commonwealth of Israel, 'and without God in the world' (Eph
2:12). Oh the dread and amazement that the guilt of sin brings
with it, when it is revealed by the God of heaven; and like to
it is the sight of mercy, when it pleaseth God, who calleth us by
his grace, to reveal his Son in us.

(2.) In effectual calling there is great awakenings about the world
to come, and the glory of unseen things; the resurrection of the
dead, and eternal judgment; the salvation that God hath prepared
for them that love him; with the blessedness that will attend us,
and be upon us, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, are great
things in the soul that is under the awakening calls of God. And
hence we are said to be called to glory (1 Thess 2:12). 'To the
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ' (2 Thess 2:14).

(3.) In effectual calling there is also a sanctifying virtue;
and hence we are said to be called with an holy calling (1 Thess
4:7), with an 'heavenly calling' (Heb 3:1). Called to glory
and virtue. 'But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood,
an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the
praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous
light' (1 Peter 2:9). Yea, effectual calling hath annexed to it,
as its inseparable companion, the promise of thorough sanctification.
'Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it' (1 Thess
5:24).

Of Faith.

I believe, that effectual calling doth therefore produce, 1.
FAITH; and therefore it is said, that 'faith cometh by hearing'
(Rom 10:17); by hearing the word that calleth us 'unto the grace
of Christ' (Gal 1:6). For by the word that calleth us, is Jesus
Christ held forth to us; and offered to be our righteousness; and
therefore the apostle saith again, that God hath called us 'unto
the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ' (1 Cor 1:9); that is, to
be made partakers of the riches of grace, and the righteousness that
is in him. 2. It produceth hope. It giveth a ground to hope; and
therefore hope is said to be the hope of our calling (Eph 1:18).
And again, 'Even as ye are called in one hope of your calling'
(Eph 4:4). Now the godly wise know, whoso misseth of effectual
calling, misseth of eternal life; because God justifieth none
but them whom he calleth; and glorifies none but those whom he
justifies: and therefore it is that Peter said before, 'Make your
calling, and [so] your election sure': make it sure, that is, prove
your calling right, by the word of God. For whoso staggereth at
the certainty of his calling, cannot comfortably hope for a share
in eternal life. 'Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which
thou hast caused me to hope. My soul fainteth for thy salvation,
but I hope in thy word' (Psa 119:49,81). 3. It produceth repentance;
for when a man hath heaven and hell before his eyes (as he will have
if he be under the power of effectual calling) or when a man hath
a revelation of the mercy and justice of God, with an heart-drawing
invitation to lay hold on the tender forgiveness of sins; and
being made also to behold the goodly beauty of holiness; it must
needs be, that repentance appears, and puts forth itself, unto
self-revenging acts, for all its wickedness which in the days of
ignorance it delighted in. And hence is that saying, 'I came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance' (Mark 2:17). For
the effecting of which, the preaching of the word of the kingdom,
is most proper: 'Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand'
(Matt 4:17).

Of Repentance.

Repentance is a turning the heart to God in Christ: a turning of
it from sin, and the devil, and darkness; to the goodness, and
grace, and holiness that is in him. Wherefore, they that of old
are said to repent, are said to loath and abhor themselves, for
all their abominations. 'I abhor myself,' [said Job,] 'and repent
in dust and ashes' (Job 42:6, see also Eze 6:9, 20:43, 36:31,
42:6, 16:63).

Godly repentance doth not only affect the soul with the loathsome
nature of sin that is past; but filleth the heart with godly
hatred of sins that yet may come. When Moses feared that through
his being overburthened with the care of the children of Israel,
some unruly or sinful passions might show themselves in him, what
saith he? 'Kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found
favour in thy sight, and let me not see my wretchedness' (Num
11:15). See also how that which Paul calleth godly repentance,
wrought in the upright Corinthians, 'Behold,' [saith he,] this self
same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness
it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves, yea, what
indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what
zeal, yea, what revenge! In all things ye have approved yourselves
to be clear in this matter (2 Cor 7:11).

Of Love.

It [effectual calling] produceth also love: wherefore Paul, when
he had put the church in remembrance that they were called of
God, adds, That concerning brotherly love, they had no need that
he should write unto them (1 Thess 4:9). As who should say, If
God be so kind to us, to forgive us our sins, to save our souls,
and to give us the kingdom of heaven; let these be motives beyond
all other to provoke us to love again. Farther, if we that are thus
beloved of God, are made members of one man's body, all partakers
of his grace, clothed all, with his glorious righteousness, and
are together appointed to be the children of the next world; why
should we not love one another? 'Beloved, if God so loved us, we
ought also to love one another' (1 John 4:11). And truly so we
shall, if the true grace of God be upon us; because we also see
them to be the called of Jesus. Travellers, that are of the same
country, love and take pleasure one in another, when they meet
in a strange land.[8] Why, we sojourn here in a strange country,
with them that are heirs together with us of the promised kingdom
and glory (Heb 11:9). Now, as I said, this holy love worketh by
love: mark, love in God and Christ when discovered, constraineth
us to love [one another] (2 Cor 5:14).

The name, therefore, and word, and truth of God in Christ, together
with the sincerity of grace, of faith, and holiness in us, are
the delightful objects of this love (Psa 119:47,127,132,159, 5:11,
69:36, 101:6). For it embraceth with delight and complacency, but
as it discerneth the image of God, and of Christ in the soul, his
presence in the ministry, and a suitableness in our worship to
the word and mind of Christ (Psa 26:8, 27:4, 84:1-4; 1 Thess 5:13;
Phil 1:3-7; Eph 4:32).

Love also hath a blessed faculty, and heavenly, in bearing and
suffering afflictions, putting up wrongs, overlooking the infirmities
of the brethren, and in serving in all Christian offices the
necessities of the saints. 'Charity suffereth long and is kind;
charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed
up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not
easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth all things,
hopeth all things, endureth all things. Charity never faileth' (1
Cor 13:4-8, also 1 Peter 4:8; Gal 5:13). In a word, it designeth
a holy conversation in this world; that God, and Christ, and the
word of Christ, 'may be glorified thereby' (2 Cor 11:10-12; 1
Peter 1:12, 3:16).

Of the Scriptures.

Touching which word of God I thus believe and confess, 1. That
all the holy scriptures are the words of God. 'All scripture is
given by inspiration of God' (2 Tim 3:16). For the prophecy [of
the scripture] came not in old time by the will of man: but holy
men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost (2 Peter
1:21). 2. I believe that the holy scriptures, of themselves, without
the addition of human inventions, are able to make the man of God
perfect in all things; and 'thoroughly to furnish him unto all good
works.' They are able 'to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus' (2 Tim 3:15). And to instruct thee
in all other things, that either respect the worship of God, or
thy walking before all men (2 Tim 3:17; 2 Peter 1:19-21). 3. I
believe the great end why God committed the scriptures to writing
was; that we might be instructed to Christ, taught how to believe
(1 John 5:13), [and be] encouraged to patience and hope, for the
grace that is to be brought unto us at the revelation of Jesus
Christ (John 20:31; Rom 15:4). Also that we might understand what
is sin, and how to avoid the commission thereof. 'Concerning the
works of men [said David] by the word of thy lips, I have kept me
from the paths of the destroyer' (Psa 17:4). 'Through thy precepts
I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way' (Psa 119:104).
'Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against
thee' (Psa 119:11). 4. I believe that they cannot be broken, but
will certainly be fulfilled in all the prophecies, threatenings,
and promises, either to the salvation or damnation of men. They
are like that flying roll, that will go over all the earth to cut
off and curse (Ze 5:2-4). In them is contained also the blessing,
they preach to us also the way of salvation (Gal 3:8). 'Beware,
therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the
prophets; Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish:[9] for I
work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe,
though a man declare it unto you' (Acts 13:40,41, see also John
10:35, 12:37-41, 3:17-19). 5. I believe that Jesus Christ, by the
word of the scriptures, will judge all men at the day of doom;
for that is the book of the law of the Lord, according to Paul's
gospel (John 12:44-50; Rom 2:16). 6. I believe, that this God
'made the world and all things [that are] therein' (Acts 17:24),
for 'in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
that in them is' (Exo 20:11). Also, that after the time of the
making thereof, he disposed of it to the children of men, with a
reserve thereof for the children of God, that should in all ages
be born thereunto. 'When the Most High divided to the nations their
inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds
of the people according to the number of the children of Israel'
(Deut 32:8), for as he 'made of one blood all nations of men for
to dwell on all the face of the earth, [so he] hath determined
the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation'
(Acts 17:26).

Of Magistracy.

I believe, that magistracy is God's ordinance, which he hath
appointed for the government of the whole world; and that it is a
judgment of God, to be without those ministers of God, which he
hath ordained to put wickedness to shame (Ju 18:7). 'Whosoever
therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God:
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. For
rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou
not then be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou
shalt have praise of the same: for he is the minister of God to
thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for
he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil. Wherefore ye
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience
sake. For this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's
ministers, attending continually upon this very thing' (Rom 13:2-6).
Many are the mercies we receive, by a well qualified magistrate,
and if any shall at any time be otherwise inclined, let us shew
our Christianity in a patient suffering, for well doing, what it
shall please God to inflict by them.[10]



A REASON OF MY PRACTICE IN WORSHIP.

Having thus made confession of my faith, I now come to shew you my
practice in worship, with the reasons thereof. The which I shall
have occasion to touch, under two distinct heads.

I. With whom I dare not hold communion.

II. With whom I dare.

Only, first, note, that by the word communion, I mean fellowship
in the things of the kingdom of Christ, or that which is commonly
called church communion, the communion of saints. For in civil
affairs, and in things of this world that are honest, I am not
altogether tied up from the fornicators thereof (1 Cor 5:9,10);
wherefore in my following discourse understand me in the first
sense:--Now, then,

FIRST, I dare not have communion with them that profess not faith
and holiness; or that are not visible saints by calling: but note,
that by this assertion, I meddle not with the elect; but as he
is a visible saint by calling; neither do I exclude the secret
hypocrite, if he be hid from me by visible saintship. Wherefore I
dare not have communion with men from a single supposition, that
they may be elect, neither dare I exclude the other from a single
supposing that he may be a secret hypocrite. I meddle not here with
these things; I only exclude him that is not a visible saint. Now
he that is visibly or openly profane, cannot be then a visible
saint; for he that is a visible saint must profess faith, and
repentance, and consequently holiness of life: and with none else
dare I communicate.

First, Because God himself hath so strictly put the difference,
both by word and deed; for from the beginning, he did not only
put a difference between the seed of the woman and the children
of the wicked (Gen 3:15), only the instinct of grace and change of
the mind is his own, but did cast out from his presence the father
of all the ungodly, even cursed Cain, when he shewed himself openly
profane, and banished him to go into the land of the runnagate,
or vagabond, where from God's face, and so the privileges of the
communion of saints, he was ever after hid (Gen 4:8-16).

Besides, when after this, through the policy of Satan, the children
of Cain, and the seed of Seth, did commix themselves in worship,
and by that means had corrupted the way of God: what followed, but
first, God judged it wickedness, raised up Noah to preach against
it, and after that, because they would not be reclaimed, he brought
the flood upon the whole world of these ungodly; and saved only
Noah alive, and his because he had kept himself righteous (Gen
6:1-13)[11]. Here I could enlarge abundantly, and add many more
instances of a like nature, but I am here only for a touch upon
things.

Second, Because it is so often commanded in the scriptures, That
all the congregation should be holy. 'I am the Lord your God: ye
shall therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I
am holy' (Lev 11:44). 'Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God
am holy' (19:2). 'Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy:
for I am the Lord your God' (20:7; 1 Peter 1:15,16). Besides, 1.
The gates of the temple were to be shut against all other. 'Open
ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth
may enter in' (Isa 26:2). 'This gate of the Lord, into which the
righteous shall enter' (Psa 118:20). 'Thus saith the Lord God:
No stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh,
shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the
children of Israel' (Eze 44:9). 2. Because the things of worship
are holy; 'Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord' (Isa
52:11). 3. Because all the limits and bounds of communion are holy.
'This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain, the
whole limit thereof--shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law
of the house' (Eze 43:12)[12].

Third, I dare not have communion with them; because the example
of New Testament churches before us, have been a community of
visible saints. Paul, to the Romans, writes thus: 'To all that be
in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints' (1:7). And to the
rest of the churches thus: 'Unto the church of God which is at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus; called to
be saints' (1 Cor 1:2). 'To the saints which are at Ephesus, and
to the faithful in Christ Jesus' (Eph 1:1). 'To all the saints
which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons' (Phil 1:1).
'To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse'
(Col 1:2). 'To the church of the Thessalonians, which is in God
the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ,' &c. (1 Thess 1:1).Thus
you see under what denomination those persons went of old, who
were counted worthy to be members of a visible church of Christ.
Besides, the members of such churches go under such characters as
these.

(1.) 'The called of Christ Jesus' (Rom 1:6). (2.) Men that have
drank into the Spirit of Jesus Christ (1 Cor 12:13). (3.) Persons
in whom was God the Father (Eph 4:6). (4.) They were all made
partakers of the joy of the gospel (Phil 1:7). (5.) Persons that
were circumcised inwardly (Col 2:11). (6.) Persons that turned
from idols to serve the living and true God (1 Thess 1:9). (7.)
Those that were the body of Christ, and members in particular,
that is, those that were visibly such; because they made profession
of faith, of holiness, of repentance, of love to Christ, and of
self-denial, at their receiving into fellowship.

Fourth, I dare not hold communion with the open profane.

(1.) Because it is promised to the church, that she shall dwell
by herself; that is, as she is a church, and spiritual; Lo, the
people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the
nations (Num 23:9). (2.) Because this is their privilege. 'But
ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation,
a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him
who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light'
(1 Peter 2:9,10). (3.) Because this is the fruit of the death of
Christ, 'who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works' (Titus 2:14). (4.) Because this is the commandment:
'Save yourselves from this untoward generation' (Acts 2:40). (5.)
Because with such it is not possible we should have true and spiritual
communion. Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers:
for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion hath light with darkness? And what concord hath
Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an
infidel? And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols?
for ye are the temple of the living God, as God hath said, I will
dwell in them and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I
will receive you, and will be a Father unto you,--saith the Lord
Almighty (2 Cor 6:14-18).

Fifth, I dare not hold communion with the open profane. Because

(1.) This would be ploughing with an ox, and an ass together
(Deut 22:10): heavenly persons suit best for communion in heavenly
matters. (2.) It subjecteth not the nature of our discipline,
which is not forced, but free,[13] in a professed subjection to
the will and commandment of Christ: others being excluded by God's
own prohibition (Lev 1:3; Rom 6:17; 2 Cor 8:12, 9:7,13, 8:5).
Paul also, when he exhorteth Timothy to follow after righteousness,
faith, charity, peace, &c., (which are the bowels of church
communion,) he saith, do it 'with them that call on the Lord, out
of a pure heart' (2 Tim 2:22).

Sixth, In a word, to hold communion with the open profane, is most
pernicious and destructive. (1.) 'Twas the wicked multitude that
fell a lusting, and that tempted Christ in the desert (Num 11:4).
(2.) It was the profane heathen, of whom Israel learned to worship
idols. They 'were mingled among the heathen, and learned their
works. And served their idols; which were a snare unto them' (Psa
106:35,36). (3.) It is the mingled people that God hath threatened
to plague with those deadly punishments of his, with which he hath
threatened to punish Babylon itself; saying, When a sword is upon
her liars, her mighty, her chariots, and treasures; a sword also
shall be upon the mingled people that are in the midst of her.

And no marvel: for, (1.) Mixed communion polluteth the ordinances
of God. Say to the rebels, saith the Lord God, 'Let it suffice
you of all your abominations, in that ye have brought into my
sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in
flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when
ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken
my covenant, because of all your abominations' (Eze 44:6,7). (2.)
It violateth he law. 'Her priests have violated my law, and have
profaned mine holy things: [how] They have put no difference
between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed difference
between the unclean and the clean' (Eze 20:26). (3.) It profaneth
the holiness of God. 'Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an
abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah
hath profaned the holiness of the Lord which he loved, and hath
married the daughter of a strange god' (Mal 2:11). (4.) It defileth
the truly gracious. 'Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth
the whole lump?' (1 Cor 5:6). Look diligently therefore, 'lest
any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many
be defiled' (Heb 12:15).

Lastly, To conclude, it provoketh God to punish with severe
judgments: And therefore heed well. (1.) As I said before, The
drowning of the whole world was occasioned by the sons of God
commixing themselves with the daughters of men; and the corruption
of worship that followed thereupon (Gen 6, 7). (2.) He sent a
plague upon the children of Israel, for joining themselves unto
the people of Moab; and for following their abominations in worship
(Num 25:1-5; Josh 22:17): and let no man think, that now I have
altered the state of the question: for it is all one with the
church to communicate with the profane; and to sacrifice and offer
their gifts to the devil (Deut 32:16-19; Psa 106:36-40)[14]: the
reason is, because such have by their sin forsaken the protection
of heaven, and are given up to their own heart-lusts; and left to
be overcome of the wicked, to whom they have joined themselves
(Deut 12, 7:1-6). join not yourselves, said God, to the wicked,
neither in religion nor marriages; 'For they will turn away thy
son from following me, that they may serve other gods: so will
the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy thee
suddenly' (Deut 7:5). 'Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these
things? yet among many nations was there no king like him who was
beloved of his God' (Neh 13:26). Hear how Paul handleth the point;
'But I say, that the things which the Gentiles [or openly profane]
sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God; and I would
not that ye should have fellowship with devils. Ye cannot drink
the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: Ye cannot be partakers
of the table of the Lord, and of the table of devils. Do we provoke
the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?' (1 Cor 10:20-22).
I conclude, that therefore it is an evil, and a dangerous thing
to hold church communion with the openly profane and ungodly. It
polluteth his ordinances: it violateth his law: it profaneth his
holiness: it defileth his people; and provoketh the Lord to severe
and terrible judgments.

Object. But we can prove in all ages [that] there have been the
open profane in the church of God.

Ans. In many ages indeed it hath been so: but mark, they appeared
not such, when first they were received unto communion (Exo 12:48),
neither were they with God's liking, as such, to be retained among
them, but in order to their admonition, repentance and amendment
of life: of which, if they failed, God presently threatened the
church; and either cut them off from the church, as he did the
idolators, fornicators, murmurers, tempters, sabbath breakers; with
Korah, Dathan, Achan, and others (2 Cor 6; 1 Cor 5; Exo 32:25;
Num 25:1-9, 21:5,6, 14:37, 16, 15:32-36; Josh 7; 2 Kings 17; Eze
22, 23) or else cut off them with the church and all, as he served
the ten tribes at one time, and the two tribes at another. 'My
God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him:
and they shall be wanderers among the nations' (Hosea 9:17). I
might here greatly enlarge, but I intend brevity; yet let me tell
you, that when Nehemiah understood by the book of the law of the
Lord, that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the
congregation of God: 'They separated from Israel all the mixed
multitude' (Neh 13:1-3). Many have pleaded for the profane, that
they should abide in the church of God; but such hath not considered,
that God's wrath at all times hath with great indignation been
shewed against such offenders and their conceits. Indeed they like
not for to plead for them under that notion, but rather as Korah,
and his company: 'All the congregation are holy every one of them'
(Num 16:3). But it maketh no matter by what name they are called;
if by their deeds they shew themselves openly wicked: for names and
notions sanctify not the heart and nature; they make not virtues
of vice, neither can it save such advocates from the heavy curse
both of God and men (Prov 17:15, 24:24). 'The righteous men, they
shall judge them after the manner of adulteresses, and after the
manner of women that shed blood; because they are adulteresses,
and blood is in their hands' (Eze 23:45).

SECOND, Thus have I shewed you with whom I dare not have communion:
and now to shew you with whom I dare. But in order thereto, I
desire you

First, To take notice; That touching shadowish, or figurative
ordinances; I believe that Christ hath ordained but two in his
church, viz., Water baptism and the supper of the Lord: both which
are of excellent use to the church in this world; they being to
us representations of the death and resurrection of Christ; and
are, as God shall make them, helps to our faith therein. But I
count them not the fundamentals of our Christianity, nor grounds
or rule to communion with saints: servants they are, and our
mystical ministers, to teach and instruct us in the most weighty
matters of the kingdom of God: I therefore here declare my reverent
esteem of them; yet dare not remove them, as some do, from the
place and end, where by God they are set and appointed; nor ascribe
unto them more than they were ordered to have in their first and
primitive institution. It is possible to commit idolatry even with
God's own appointments: but I pass this, and come to the thing
propounded.

Second, then, I dare have communion, church communion, with those
that are visible saints by calling: with those that, by the word
of the gospel, have been brought over to faith and holiness: and
it maketh no matter to me, what their life was heretofore, if they
now be 'washed,' if they be 'sanctified,' if they be 'justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God' (1 Cor
6:11). Now in order to the discovery of this faith and holiness,
and so to fellowship in church communion: I hold it requisite
that a faithful relation be made thereof by the party thus to be
received; yea, if need be, by witnesses also, for the satisfaction
of the church, that she may receive in faith and judgment, such
as best shall suit her holy profession (Acts 9:26-28; 1 Cor 16:10;
2 Cor 8:23). Observe it; these texts do respect extraordinary
officers; and yet see, that in order to their reception by the
church, there was made to them a faithful relation of the faith
and holiness of those very persons; for no man may intrude himself
upon, or thrust himself upon, or thrust himself into a church of
Christ; without the church have first the knowledge and liking of
the person to be received: if otherwise, there is a door opened
for all the heretics in the world; yea, for devils also if they
appear in human shapes. But Paul shows you the manner of receiving,
by pleading (after some disgrace thrown upon him by the false
apostles) for his own admission of his companions: 'Receive us,
[saith he,] we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man; we
have defrauded no man' (2 Cor 7:2). And so concerning Timothy: 'If
Timotheus come, [saith he,] see that he may be with you without
fear: for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do' (1 Cor
16:10). Also, when Paul supposed that Titus might be suspected by
some; see how he pleads for him: If 'any do enquire of Titus, he
is my partner and fellow-helper concerning you: or our brethren
be enquired of, they are the messengers of the churches, and the
glory of Christ' (2 Cor 8:23). Phebe also, when she was to be
received by the church at Rome; see how he speaketh in her behalf:
'I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the
church which is sat Cenchrea: that ye receive her in the Lord,
as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business
she hath need of you; for she hath been a succourer of many, and
of myself also' (Rom 16:1,2). Yea, when the apostles and brethren
sent their epistles from Jerusalem to Antioch; under what characters
do those go, that were the messengers to them? 'It seemed good
unto [the Holy Ghost and to] us,--to send chosen men unto you with
our beloved Barnabas and Paul, men that have hazarded their lives
for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,' &c. (Acts 15:25-27). Now
though the occasions upon which these commendations were written
were not simply, or only, in order to church relation, but also
for other causes; yet because the persons concerned were of the
churches to be received as faithful, and such who would partake
of church privileges with them, they have, therefore, their faith
and faithfulness related to the churches, as those that were
particularly embodied there. Besides Timothy and Titus being
extraordinary officers, stood as members and officers in every
church where they were received. Likewise Barnabas and Saul, Judas
and Silas, abode as members and officers where they were sent.
It was requisite, therefore, that the letters of recommendation
should be in substance the same with that relation that ought to
be made to the church, by or for the person that is to be embodied
there. But to return, I DARE HAVE COMMUNION, CHURCH COMMUNION,
WITH THOSE THAT ARE VISIBLE SAINTS BY CALLING.

Quest. But by what rule would you receive them into fellowship
with yourselves?

Ans. Even by a discovery of their faith and holiness, and their
declaration of willingness to subject themselves to the laws and
government of Christ in his church.

Quest. But do you not count that by water baptism, and not otherwise,
that being the initiating and entering ordinance; they ought to
be received into fellowship?

Ans. No; But tarry, and take my sense with my word. For herein
lies the mistake, To think that because in time past baptism was
administered upon conversion, that therefore it is the initiating
and entering ordinance into church communion: when by the word no
such thing is testified of it. Besides, that it is not so will be
manifest, if we consider the nature and power of such an ordinance.

That ordinance then, that is, the initiating or entering ordinance
[as before] doth give to them that partake thereof a right to,
and a being of, membership with that particular church by which
it is administered. I say, a right to, and a being of, membership,
without the addition of another church act. This is evident by the
law of circumcision, which was the initiating law of old; for by
the administration of that very ordinance, the partaker thereof
was forthwith a member of that congregation, without the addition
of another church act (Gen 17). This is declared in its first
institution, and therefore it is called the token of the covenant.
The token or sign of righteousness, of Abraham's faith, and of the
visible membership of those that joined themselves to the church
with him; the very inlet into church communion that gave a being
of membership among them. And thus Moses himself expounds it;
'every man's servant, that is bought for money, when thou hast
circumcised him, then shall eat' of the passover (Exo 12:44), without
the addition of another church act, to empower him thereunto; his
circumcision hath already given him a being there, and so a right
to, and privilege in church relation: 'A foreigner and an hired
servant shall not eat thereof, [because not circumcised]. And when
a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to
the LORD, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come
near and keep it; [For then he is one of the church] and he shall
be as one born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat
thereof' (Exo 12:48). Neither could any other thing, according to
the law of circumcision, give the devoutest person that breathed
a being of membership with them. 'He that is born in thy house,
and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised:--and
the uncircumcised man child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people' (Gen
17:13,14). Note then, that that which is the initiating ordinance
admitteth none into church communion but these that first partake
thereof. The angel sought to kill Moses himself, for attempting
to make his child a member without it (Exo 4:24-26). Note again,
that as it admitteth of none to membership without it; so as I
said, the very act of circumcising them, without the addition of
another church act, gave them a being of membership with that
very church, by whom they were circumcised. But none of this can
be said of baptism. First, there is none debarred or threatened
to be cut off from the church, if they be not first baptized.
Secondly, Neither doth it give to the person baptized a being
of membership with this or that church, by whose members he hath
been baptized. John gathered no particular church, yet was he the
first and great baptizer with water; he preached Christ to come,
and baptized with the baptism of repentance, and left his disciples
to be gathered by him (Acts 19:3-5). 'And unto him shall the
gathering of the people be' (Gen 49:10). Besides, after Christ's
ascension, Philip baptized the eunuch, but made him by that no
member of any particular church,. We only read, that Philip was
caught away from him, and that the eunuch saw him no more, but
went on his way rejoicing to his master and country of Ethiopia
(Acts 8:35-40). Neither was Cornelius made a member of the church
at Jerusalem, by his being baptized at Peter's command at Cesarea
(Acts 10, 11). Neither were they that were converted at Antioch,
by them that were scattered from the church at Jerusalem, by their
baptism, if they were baptized [in water] at all, joined to the
church at Jerusalem (Acts 11:19). No, they were after gathered and
embodied among themselves by other church acts (Acts 16). What
shall I say? into what particular church was Lydia baptized by
Paul, or those first converts at Philippi? Yea even in the second
of the Acts, baptizing and adding to the church appear to be acts
distinct: but if baptism were the initiating ordinance, then was
he that was baptized made a member; made a member of a particular
church, by the very act of water baptism. Neither ought any by God's
ordinance to have baptized any, but with respect to the admitting
them by that act to a being of membership in this particular church.
For if it be the initiating ordinance, it entereth them into the
church: What church? Into a visible church. Now there is no church
visible but that which is particular; the universal being utterly
invisible, and known to none but God. The person then that is
baptized stands by that a member of no church at all, neither of
the visible, nor yet of the invisible. A visible saint he is, but
not made so by baptism; for he must be a visible saint before,
else he ought not to be baptized (Acts 8:37, 9:17, 16:33).

Take it again; Baptism [in water] makes thee no member of the
church, neither particular nor universal: neither doth it make
thee a visible saint: It therefore gives thee neither right to
nor being of membership at all.

Quest. But why then were they baptized?

Ans. That their own faith by that figure might be strengthened in
the death and resurrection of Christ. And that themselves might
see, that they have professed themselves dead, and buried, and
risen with him to newness of life (Col 2:12; Rom 6:4). It did not
seal to the church that they were so (their satisfaction as to
that arose from better arguments) but taught the party himself
that he ought so to be. Farther, it confirmed to his own conscience
the forgiveness of sins, if by unfeigned faith he laid hold upon
Jesus Christ (Gal 3:26; 1 Cor 15:29; Acts 2:38, 22:16; 1 Peter
3:21). Now then, if baptism be not the initiating ordinance, we
must seek for entering some other way, by some other appointment
of Christ, unless we will say that without rule, without order,
and without an appointment of Christ, we may enter into his visible
kingdom. The church under the law had its initiating and entering
ordinance: it must not therefore be, unless we should think that
Moses was more punctual and exact than Christ, but that also our
Lord hath his entering appointment. Now that which by Christ is
made the door of entrance into the church, by that we may doubtless
enter; and seeing baptism is not that ordinance, we ought not to
seek to enter thereby, but may with good conscience enter without
it.

Quest. But by what rule then would you gather persons into church
communion?

Ans. Even by that rule by which they are discovered to the church
to be visible saints; and willing to be gathered into their body
and fellowship. By that word of God therefore, by which their
faith, experience and conversation, being examined, is found good;
by that the church should receive them into fellowship with them.
Mark; not as they practice things that are circumstantial, but as
their faith is commended by a word of faith, and their conversation
by a moral precept. Wherefore that is observable, that after Paul
had declared himself sound of faith, he falls down to the body
of the law: 'Receive us, [saith he,] we have wronged no man, we
have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man.' He saith not, I
am baptized, but I have wronged no man, &c. (2 Cor 7:2, see also
5:18-21). And if churches after the confession of faith made more
use of the ten commandments, to judge of the fitness of persons
by; they might not exceed by this seeming strictness, Christian
tenderness towards them they receive to communion.

I will say therefore, that by the word of faith, and of good
works, moral duties gospelized, we ought to judge of the fitness
of members by, by which we ought also to receive them to fellowship:
For he that in these things proveth sound, he hath the antitype
of circumcision, which was before the entering ordinance. 'For he
is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision,
which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew, which is one
inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit,--whose
praise is not of men, but of God' (Rom 2:28,29: Phil 3:1-4). Now
a confession of this by word and life, makes this inward circumcision
visible; when you know him therefore to be thus circumcised, you
ought to admit him to the Lord's passover: he, if any, hath a share
not only in church communion, but a visible right to the kingdom
of heaven. Again, 'For the kingdom of God, [or our service to
Christ] is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy
in the Holy Ghost. For he that in these things serveth Christ,
is acceptable to God, and approved of men' (Rom 14:17,18; Deut
28:47). By which word Righteousness, he meaneth as James doth, the
royal law, the perfect law, which is the moral precept evangelized,
or delivered to us by the hand of Christ (John 2:8.9). The law was
given twice on Sinai: the last time it was given with a proclamation
of grace and mercy of God, and of the pardon of sins going before
(Exo 19, 34:1-10). The second giving is here intended; for so
it cometh after faith, which first receiveth the proclamation of
forgiveness; hence we are said to do this righteousness in the joy
and peace of the Holy Ghost. Now he that in these things serveth
Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men. For who is he
that can justly find fault with him, that fulfilleth the royal
law from a principle of faith and love. 'If ye fulfil the royal
law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself, ye do well'; ye are approved of men. Again, he that hath
loved another hath fulfilled the law, for love is the fulfilling
of the law. He then that serveth Christ according to the royal law,
from faith and love going before, he is a fit person for church
communion; God accepteth him, men approve him. Now that the royal
law is the moral precept, read the place (John 2:8-12). It is also
called the law of liberty, because the bondage is taken away by
forgiveness going before; and this is it by which we are judged,
as is said, meet or unmeet for church communion, &c.

Therefore I say, the rule by which we receive church-members,
it is the word of the faith of Christ, and of the moral precept
evangelized, as I said before, I am 'under the law to Christ,'
saith Paul (1 Cor 9:21). So when he forbiddeth us communion with
men, they be such as are destitute of the faith of Christ, and
live in the transgression of a moral precept: 'I have written unto
you, [saith he,] not to keep company, if any man that is called a
brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer,
or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one no not to eat'
(1 Cor 5:11). He saith not, if any man be not baptized [in water],
have not hands laid on him, or join with the unbaptized, these are
fictious, scriptureless notions. 'For this, Thou shalt not commit
adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, thou shalt
not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet; And if there be any
other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying,
namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Love worketh
no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the
law' (Rom 13:9,10). The word of faith, and the moral precept,
is that which Paul enjoins the Galatians and Philippians, still
avoiding outward circumstances: hence therefore when he had to the
Galatians treated of faith, he falls point blank upon moral duties.
'For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walk according
to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of
God' (Gal 6:15,16). As many as walk according to this rule: What
rule? The rule by which men are proved new creatures: The word
of faith, and the moral precept. Wherefore Paul exhorteth the
Ephesians not to walk, 'as other Gentiles, in the vanity of their
mind'; seeing they had received Christ, and had 'heard him, and
had been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus.' That they would
put off the old man; what is that? Why, 'the former conversation,'
which is 'corrupt according to the deceitful lusts'; lying,
anger, sin, giving place to the devil, corrupt communication, all
bitterness, wrath, clamour, evil-speaking, with all malice. And
that they would 'put on the new man.' What is that? That which is
'created in righteousness and true holiness'; a being 'renewed
in the spirit' of their mind, and a putting away all these things
(Eph 4). 'For in Christ Jesus'; these words are put in, on purpose
to shew us the nature of New Testament administrations, and how
they differ from the old. In Moses an outward conformity to an
outward and carnal ordinance, was sufficient to give (they subjecting
themselves thereto) a being of membership with the Jews; but in
Christ Jesus it is not so; of Abraham's flesh was the national
Jewish congregation; but it is Abraham's faith that makes New
Testament churches: They that are of faith, are the children of
faithful Abraham. They that are of faith, the same are the children
of Abraham (Gal 3:7-9). So then the seed being now spiritual,
the rule must needs be spiritual also, viz. The word of faith
and holiness. This is the gospel concision knife, sharper than
any two-edged sword; and that by which New Testament saints are
circumcised in heart, ears, and lips. 'For in Christ Jesus,' [is]
no outward and circumstantial thing, but the new creature; none
are subjects of the visible kingdom of Christ but visible saints
by calling: now that which manifesteth a person to be a visible
saint, must be conformity to the word of faith and holiness. 'And
they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections
and lusts' (Gal 5:24). Hearken how delightfully Paul handleth the
point: The new creatures are the Israel of God. The new creature
hath a rule by himself to walk by; and as many as walk according
to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel
of God. Paul to the Philippians commandeth as much; where treating
of his own practice in the doctrine of faith and holiness, requireth
them to walk by the same rule, to mind the same thing. I desire
to be found in Christ, saith he, I reach forward toward the things
that are before; my conversation is in heaven, and flatly opposite
to them whose God is their belly, who glory in their shame, and
who mind earthly things. Brethren, saith he, 'be followers together
of me, and mark them which walk so' (Phil 3:17). Mark them; for
what? For persons that are to be received into fellowship, and the
choicest communion of saints. And indeed this is the safest way to
judge of the meetness of persons by: for take away the confession
of faith and holiness; and what can distinguish a Christian from
a Turk? He that indeed receiveth faith, and that squareth his life
by the royal, perfect, moral precept; and that walketh therein,
in the joy and peace of the Holy Ghost, no man can reject him; he
cannot be a man if he object against him; not a man in Christ;
not a man in understanding. 'The law is not made for a righteous
man'; neither to debar him the communion of saints if he desire
it, nor to cast him out if he were in. 'But for the lawless
and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and
profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for
manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves
with mankind, for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons,
and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine;
according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God, which was
committed to my trust' (1 Tim 1:9-11). Paul also, when he would
leave an everlasting conviction upon the Ephesians, concerning his
faith and holiness, treating first of the sufficiency of Christ's
blood, and the grace of God to save us; he adds, 'I have coveted
no man's silver, or gold, or apparel,' he bringeth them to the
moral precept, to prove the sincerity of his good conversation
by (Acts 20:33). And when men have juggled what they can, and
made never such a prattle about religion; yet if their greatest
excellency, as to the visibility of their saintship, lieth in an
outward conformity to an outward circumstance in religion, their
profession is not worth two mites. 'Let us walk honestly, as in
the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying. But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the
lusts thereof' (Rom 13:13,14). And it is observable, that after
the apostle had in the 9th and 10th verses of this chapter told
us, that the moral precept is the rule of a good conversation,
and exhorted us to make no provision for the flesh; he adds, these
things provided, we may receive any that believe in Christ Jesus
unto communion with us; how weak soever and dark in circumstantials;
and chiefly designs the proof thereof in the remaining part of
his epistle. For he that is of sound faith, and of conversation
honest in the world; no man, however he may fail in circumstantials,
may lightly reproach or vilify him. And indeed such persons are
the honour of Christian congregations. Indeed he is prejudiced,
for want of light in these things about which he is dark, as
of baptism, or the like; but seeing that is not the initiating
ordinance, or the visible character of a saint; yea, seeing it
maketh no breach in a good and holy life: nor intrencheth upon
any man's right but his own; and seeing his faith may be effectual
without it, and his life approved by the worst of his enemies;
why should his friends, while he keeps the law, dishonour God by
breaking of the same? 'Speak not evil one of another, brethren.
He that speaketh evil of his brother, and judgeth his brother,
speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the law: But if thou judge
the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge' (James 4:11).
He that is judged, must needs fail somewhere in the apprehension
of him that judgeth him, else why is he judged. But he must fail
in substance, for then he is worthy to be judged (1 Cor 5:12).
His failure is then in a circumstance, for which he ought not to
be judged.

Object. But notwithstanding all that you have said, water baptism
ought to go before the church-membership; shew me one in all the
New Testament, that was received into fellowship without it.

Ans. 1. That water baptism hath formerly gone first is granted:
but that it ought of necessity so to do, I never saw proof. 2.
None ever received it without light going before, unless they did
play the hypocrite: and besides no marvel though in the primitive
times it was so generally practised first, for the unconverted
themselves know, it belonged to the disciples of Jesus Christ
(John 1:24-27). Yet that all that were received into fellowship
were even then baptized first, would strain a weak man's wit to
prove it, if arguments were closely made upon these three texts of
holy scripture (1 Cor 1:14-16; Gal 3:27; Rom 6:3). But I pass them,
and say, If you can shew me the Christian, that in the primitive
times remained dark about it, I will shew you the Christian that
was received without it. But should I grant more than can be
proved, viz. That baptism was the initiating ordinance; and that
it once did, as circumcision of old, give a being of membership
to the partakers; yea set the case that men were forbidden then
to enter into fellowship without it: yet the case may so be, that
these things notwithstanding, men might be received into fellowship
without it. All these things intailed to circumcision; that was the
initiating ordinance; that gave being of membership; that was it
without which it was positively commanded none should be received
into fellowship (Josh 5). Yet for all this more than six hundred
thousand were received into the church without it, yea received,
and also retained there, and that by Moses and Joshua, even those
to whom the land was promised, when the uncircumcised were cut
off. But why then were they not circumcised? Doubtless there was
a reason; either they wanted time, or opportunity, or instruments,
or something. But they could not render a bigger reason than this,
I have no light therein: which is the cause at this day that many
a faithful man denieth to take up the ordinance of baptism: but
I say whatever the hindrance was, it mattereth not; our brethren
have a manifest one, an invincible one, one that all the men on
earth, nor angels in heaven can remove: For it is God that createth
light; and for them to do it without light would but prove them
unfaithful to themselves, and make them sinners against God; 'For
whatsoever is not of faith is sin' (Rom 14:23). If therefore Moses
and Joshua thought fit to communicate with six hundred thousand
uncircumcised persons; when by the law not one such ought to
have been received among them; why may not I have communion, the
closest communion with visible saints as afore described, although
they want light in, and so cannot submit to that, which of God
was never made the wall of division betwixt us. I shall therefore
hold communion with such.

First, Because the true visible saint hath already [been] subjected
to that which is better; even to the righteousness of God, which
is by faith of Jesus Christ; by which he stands just before God;
he also hath made the most exact and strict rule under heaven,
that whereby he squares his life before men. He hath like precious
faith with the best of saints, and a conversation according to
light received, becoming the gospel of Christ. He is therefore
to be received, received I say, not by THY light, not for that in
circumstances he jumpeth with thy opinion; but according to his own
faith which he ought to keep to himself before God. 'Conscience,
I say, not thine own, but of the other; for why is my liberty
judged of another man's conscience' (1 Cor 10:29). Some indeed
do object, that what the apostles wrote, they wrote to gathered
churches, and so to such as were baptized. And therefore the
arguments that are in the epistles about things circumstantial,
respect not the case in hand. But I will tell such, that as to the
first part of their objection, they are utterly under a mistake.
The first to the Corinthians, the epistle of James, both them of
Peter, and the first epistle of John, were expressly written to
all the godly, as well as particular churches. Again; if water
baptism, as the circumstances with which the churches were pestered
of old, trouble their peace, wound the consciences of the godly,
dismember and break their fellowship; it is, although an ordinance,
for the present to be prudently shunned; for the edification of
the church, as I shall shew anon, is to be preferred before it.

Second, and observe it; 'One Spirit,--one hope,--one Lord, one
faith, one baptism [not of water, for by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body] one God and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in you all' (Eph 4:1-6). This is a sufficient
rule for us to hold communion by, and also to endeavour the
maintaining that communion, and to keep it in unity, within the
bond of peace against all attempts whatsoever (1 Cor 12:16).

Third, I am bold therefore to have communion with such (Heb
6:1,2). Because they also have the doctrine of baptism: I say the
doctrine of them. For here you must note, I distinguish between
the doctrine and practice of water baptism; The doctrine being
that which by the outward sign is presented to us, or which by
the outward circumstance of the act is preached to the believer:
viz. THE DEATH OF CHRIST; MY DEATH WITH CHRIST; also his resurrection
from the dead, and mine with him to newness of life. This is the
doctrine which baptism preacheth, or that which by the outward
action is signified to the believing receiver. Now I say, he that
believeth in Jesus Christ hath richer and better than that [of
baptism in water], viz. is dead to sin, and that lives to God by
him, he hath the HEART, POWER and DOCTRINE of baptism: all then
that he wanteth, is but the sign, the shadow, or the outward
circumstances thereof. Nor yet is THAT despised but forborne for
want of light. The best of baptisms he hath; he is baptized by
that one Spirit; he hath the heart of water baptism, he wanteth
only the outward shew, which if he had would not prove him a truly
visible saint; it would not tell me he had grace in his heart. It
is no characteristical note to another, of my sonship with God.
Indeed it is a sign to the person baptized, and an help to his own
faith. He should know by that circumstance, that he hath received
remission of sins; if his faith be as true, as his being baptized
is felt by him. But if for want of light, he partake not of
that sign, his faith can see it in other things, exceeding great
and precious promises. Yea, as I also have hinted already, if he
appear not a brother before, he appeareth not a brother by that:
And those that shall content themselves to make that the note of
visible church-membership; I doubt make things not much better,
the note of their sonship with God.

Fourth, I am bold to hold communion with visible saints as afore
[described]; because God hath communion with them; whose examples
in the case, we are straitly commanded to follow. 'Receive ye one
another as Christ also received us [saith Paul,] to the glory of
God' (Rom 15:1-7). Yea, though they be saints of opinions contrary
to you; though it goeth against the mind of them that are strong.
'We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please ourselves' (Rom 15:1). What infirmities?
Those that are natural are incident to all, they are infirmities
then that are sinful, that cause a man, for want of light, to err
in circumstantials; And the reason upon which he grounds this
admonition is, that 'Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is
written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me.'
You say, to have communion with such weak brethren, reproacheth
your opinions, and practice. Grant it, your dulness and deadness,
and imperfections also reproach the holiness of God; if you say
no, for Christ hath borne our sins; the answer is still the same,
Their sins also are fallen upon Christ; he then that hath taken
away thy sins from before the throne of God; hath taken away their
shortness in conformity to an outward circumstance in religion. Both
your infirmities are fallen upon Christ; yea, if notwithstanding
thy great sins, thou standest by Christ complete before the throne
of God; why may not thy brother, notwithstanding his little ones,
stand complete before thee in the church.

Vain man! think not by the straitness of thine order, in outward
and bodily conformity, to outward and shadowish circumstances,
that thy peace is maintained with God, for peace with God is by
faith in the blood of his cross; who hath borne the reproaches of
you both. Wherefore he that hath communion with God for Christ's
sake, is as good and as worthy of the communion of saints as
thyself. He erreth in A CIRCUMSTANCE, thou errest in A SUBSTANCE;
who must bear these errors? Upon whom must these reproaches fall?
(Phil 1:10). Some of the things of God that are excellent, have
not been approved by some of the saints: What then? must these
for this be cast out of the church? No, these reproaches by which
the wisdom of heaven is reproached have fallen upon me, saith
Christ. But to return; GOD HATH RECEIVED HIM, Christ hath received
him, therefore do you receive him. There is more solidity in this
argument, than if all the churches of God had received him. This
receiving then, because it is set as an example to the church, is
such as must needs be visible to them; and is best described by
that word which discovereth the visible saint. Whoso, therefore,
you can by the word, judge a visible saint, one that walketh with
God; you may judge by the selfsame word that God hath received
him. Now him that God receiveth and holdeth communion with, him
you should receive and hold communion with. Will any say we cannot
believe that God hath received any but such as are baptized [in
water]? I will not suppose a brother so stupefied; and therefore
to that I will not answer.

Receive him 'TO THE GLORY OF GOD.' To the glory of God, is put in
on purpose, to show what dishonour they bring to God, who despise
to have communion with them; who yet they know have communion
with God. For how doth this man, or that church, glorify God, or
count the wisdom and holiness of heaven beyond them, when they
refuse communion with them, concerning whom, they are by the word
convinced, that they have communion with God. 'Now the God of
patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one towards
another according to Christ Jesus' (Rom 15:5). By this word
patience, Paul insinuateth how many imperfections, the choicest
Christians do mingle their best performances with. And by this
of consolation, how readily God overlooks, passeth by them, and
comforteth you notwithstanding. Now that this mind should be in
Christians one to another, is manifest; because Paul prays that
it might be so. But this is an heavenly gift, and therefore must
be fetched from thence. But let the patience of God, and the
willingness of Christ, to bear the reproaches of the weak; and
the consolations that they have in God, notwithstanding, moderate
your passions, and put you upon prayer, to be minded like Jesus
Christ.

Fifth, Because a failure in such a circumstance as water, doth
not unchristian us. This must needs be granted, not only from what
was said before; but for that thousands of thousands that could
not consent thereto as we have, more gloriously than we are like
to do, acquitted themselves and their christianity before men, and
are now with the innumerable company of angels and the spirits of
just men made perfect. What is said of eating, or the contrary,
may as to this be said of water baptism. Neither if I be baptized,
am I the better, neither if I be not, am I the worse: not the
better before God: not the worse before men: still meaning as Paul
doth, provided I walk according to my light with God: otherwise
it is false; for if a man that seeth it to be his duty shall
despisingly neglect it; or if he that hath no faith therein shall
foolishly take it up; both these are for this the worse, being
convicted in themselves for transgressors. He therefore that doth
it according to his light, doth well, and he that doth it not, or
dare not do it for want of light, doth not ill; for he approveth
his heart to be sincere with God; he dare not do any thing but by
light in the word. If therefore he be not by grace a partaker of
light, in that circumstance which thou professest; yet he is a
partaker of that liberty and mercy by which thou standest. He hath
liberty to call God father, as thou: and to believe he shall be
saved by Jesus: his faith, as thine, hath purified his heart: he
is tender of the glory of God as thou art: and can claim by grace
an interest in heaven; which thou must not do because of water:
ye are both then Christians before God and men without it: he
that can, let him preach to himself by that: he that cannot, let
him preach to himself by the promises; but yet let us rejoice in
God together: let us exalt his name together. Indeed the baptized
can thank God for that, for which another cannot; but may not he
that is unbaptized thank God for that which the baptized cannot?
Wouldest thou be content that I should judge thee, because thou
canst not for my light give thanks with me? why then should he
judge me, for that I cannot give thanks with him for his? 'Let us
not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather,
that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in
his brother's way' (Rom 14:13). And seeing the things wherein we
exceed each other, are such as neither make nor mar Christianity;
let us love one another and walk together by that glorious rule
above specified, leaving each other in all such circumstances
to our own master, to our own faith. 'Who art thou that judgest
another man's servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth.
Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him stand'
(Rom 14:4).

Sixth, I am therefore for holding communion thus, because the
edification of souls in the faith and holiness of the gospel, is
of greater concernment than an agreement in outward things;[16]
I say, it is of greater concernment with us, and of far more
profit to our brother; than our agreeing in, or contesting for the
business of water baptism (John 16:13; 1 Cor 14:26; 2 Cor 10:8,
12:19; Eph 4:12; 2 Tim 3:17; 1 Cor 8:1, 13:1-4). That the edification
of the soul, is of the greatest concern, is out of measure evident
because heaven and eternal happiness are so immediately concerned
therein. Besides, this is that for which Christ died, for which
the Holy Ghost was given, yea for which the scriptures and the
gifts of all the godly are given to the church; yea, and if gifts
are not bent to this very work, the persons are said to be proud
or uncharitable that have them; and stand but for cyphers or
worse among the churches of God. Farther, edification is that that
cherisheth all grace, and maketh the Christians quick and lively,
and maketh sin lean and dwindling, and filleth the mouth with
thanksgiving to God. But to contest with gracious men, with men
that walk with God; to shut such out of the churches; because they
will not sin against their souls, rendereth thee uncharitable (Rom
14:15,20). Thou seekest to destroy the word of God; thou begettest
contentions, janglings, murmurings, and evil surmisings, thou
ministerest occasion for whisperings, backbitings, slanders and
the like, rather than godly edifying; contrary to the whole current
of the scriptures and peace of all communities. Let us therefore
leave off these contentions, 'and follow after the things that
make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another' (Rom
14:19). And know that the edification of the church of God dependeth
not upon, neither is tied to this or that circumstance. Especially
when there are in the hearts of the godly, different persuasions
about it; then it becometh them in the wisdom of God, to take
more care for their peace and unity; than to widen or make large
their uncomfortable differences.

Although Aaron transgressed the law, because he ate not the
sin-offering of the people; yet seeing he could not do it with
satisfaction to his own conscience, Moses was content that he left
it undone (Lev 10:16-20). Joshua was so zealous against Eldad and
Medad, for prophesying in the camp, without first going to the
Lord to the door of the tabernacle, as they were commanded, that
he desired Moses to forbid them (Num 11:27,28). But Moses calls
his zeal envy, and prays to God for more such prophets; knowing
that although they failed in a circumstance, they were right in
that which was better. The edification of the people in the camp
was that which pleased Moses.

In Hezekiah's time, though the people came to the passover in
an undue manner, and 'did eat it otherwise than it was written';
yet the wise king would not forbid them, but rather admitted it,
knowing that their edification was of greater concern, than to
hold them to a circumstance or two (2 Chron 30:13-27). Yea, God
himself did like the wisdom of the king, and healed, that is,
forgave, the people at the prayer of Hezekiah. And observe it,
notwithstanding this disorder, as to circumstances, the feast was
kept with great gladness; and the Levites and the priests praised
the Lord day by day, singing with loud instruments unto the Lord;
yea, there was not the like joy in Jerusalem from the time of
Solomon unto that same time. What shall we say, all things must
give place to the profit of the people of God. Yea, sometimes laws
themselves, for their outward preservation, much more for godly
edifying. When Christ's disciples plucked the ears of corn on
the sabbath, no doubt for very hunger, and were rebuked by the
Pharisees for it, as for that which was unlawful; how did their
Lord succour them? By excusing them, and rebuking their adversaries.
'Have ye not read,' said he, 'what David did when he was an hungered,
and they that were with him; how he entered into the house of God,
and did eat the shew bread, which was not lawful for him to eat,
neither for them which were with him, but only for the priests?
Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath days the
priests in the temple profaned the sabbath, and are blameless?'
(Matt 12:1-5). Why blameless? because they did it in order to the
edification of the people. If laws and ordinances of old have been
broken, and the breach of them borne with, when yet the observance
of outward things was more strictly commanded than now, when the
profit and edification of the people came in competition, how much
more may not we have communion, church communion, where no law is
transgressed thereby.

Seventh, Therefore I am for holding communion thus, because love,
which above all things we are commanded to put on, is of much more
worth than to break about baptism; Love is also more discovered
when it receiveth for the sake of Christ and grace, than when it
refuseth for want of water: and observe it, as I have also said
before, this exhortation to love is grounded upon the putting
on of the new creature; which new creature hath swallowed up all
distinctions, that have before been common among the churches. As
I am a Jew, you are a Greek; I am circumcised, you are not: I am
free, you are bound. Because Christ was all in all these, 'Put
on therefore,' saith he, 'as the elect of God, holy and beloved,
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering,' that is, with reference to the infirmities of
the weak, 'forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if
any man have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you,
so also do ye: and above all these things put on charity, which
is the bond of perfectness' (Col 3:12-14). Which forbearing and
forgiving respecteth not only private and personal injuries, but
also errors in judgment about inclinations and distinctions tending
to divisions, and separating upon the grounds laid down in verse
11 which how little soever they now seem to us, who are beyond
them, were strong, and of weight to them who in that day were
entangled with them. Some saints then were not free to preach to
any but the Jews: denying the word of life to the Gentiles, and
contending with them who preferred it to them: which was a greater
error than this of baptism (Acts 11:1-19). But what should we do
with such kind of saints? Why love them still, forgive them, bear
with them, and maintain church communion with them. Why? because
they are new creatures, because they are Christ's: for this swallows
up all distinctions. Farther, because they are elect and beloved
of God. Divisions and distinctions are of shorter date than election;
let not them therefore that are but momentary, and hatched in
darkness, break that bond that is from everlasting. It is love,
not baptism, that discovereth us to the world to be Christ's
disciples. It is love, that is the undoubted character of our
interest in, and sonship with God: I mean when we love as saints,
and desire communion with others, because they have fellowship
one with another, in their fellowship with God the Father, and
his Son Jesus Christ (1 John 1:3). And now though the truth and
sincerity of our love to God, be then discovered when we keep his
commandments, in love to his name; yet we should remember again,
that the two head and chief commandments, are faith in Jesus, and
love to the brethren (1 John 3:23). So then he that pretendeth
to love, and yet seeks not the profit of his brother in chief; he
loveth, but they are his own opinions and froward notions (James
4:11; Rom 14:21). 'Love is the fulfilling of the law'; but he
fulfils it not who judgeth and setteth at nought his brother;
that stumbleth, offendeth, and maketh weak his brother; and all
for the sake of a circumstance, that to which he cannot consent,
except he sin against his own soul, or Papist like, live by
an implicit faith.[17] Love therefore is sometimes more seen and
showed, in forbearing to urge and press what we know, than in
publishing and imposing. 'I could not,' (saith Paul, love would
not let me) 'speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal,
even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not
with meat: for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet
now are ye able' (1 Cor 3:1,2). The apostle considered not only
the knowledge that he had in the mysteries of Christ; but the
temper, the growth, and strength of the churches, and accordingly
kept back, or communicated to them, what might be for their profit
(Acts 20:18-20). So Christ, 'I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now' (John 16:12). It may be some
will count these old and threadbare texts; but such must know,
that the word of the Lord must stand for ever (Isa 40:8). And I
should dare to say to such, if the best of thy new shifts, be to
slight, and abuse old scriptures; it shews thou art more fond of
thy unwarrantable opinion, than swift to hear, and ready to yield
to the authority that is infallible.

But to conclude this, when we attempt to force our brother beyond
his light, or to break his heart with grief; to thrust him beyond
his faith, or to bar him from his privilege: how can we say, I
love? What shall I say? To have fellowship one with another for
the sake of an outward circumstance, or to make that the door to
fellowship which God hath not; yea to make that the including,
excluding charter; the bounds, bar, and rule of communion; when
by the word of the everlasting testament there is no warrant for
it; to speak charitably, if it be not for want of love, it is
for want of knowledge in the mysteries of the kingdom of Christ.
Strange! take two Christians equal in all points but this, nay,
let one go beyond the other far, for grace and holiness; yet
this circumstance of water shall drown and sweep away all his
excellencies, not counting him worthy of that reception, that with
hand and heart shall be given to a novice in religion, because he
consents to water.

Eighth. But for God's people to divide into parties, or to shut
each other from church communion; though from greater points, and
upon higher pretences, than this of water baptism; hath heretofore
been counted carnal, and the actors herein babyish Christians.
Paul and Apollos, Cephas and Christ, were doubtless higher things
than those about which we contend: yet when they made divisions for
them; how sharply are they rebuked? Are ye not CARNAL, CARNAL,
CARNAL? For whereas there are among you, envyings, strife, divisions,
or factions: 'are ye not carnal' (1 Cor 1:11,12, 3:1-4). While
one saith, I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollos, are ye not
carnal? See therefore from whence arise all they endeavours, zeal,
and labour, to accomplish divisions among the godly: let Paul
or Cephas, or Christ himself, be the burthen of thy song, yet the
heart from whence they flow is carnal; and thy actions, discoveries
of childishness. But, doubtless when these contentions were among
the Corinthians, and one man was vilified, that another might be
promoted; a lift with a carnal brother, was thought great wisdom
to widen the breach. But why should HE be rebuked, that said he
was for Christ? Because he was for him in opposition to his holy
apostles. Hence he saith, 'Is Christ divided,' or separate from
his servants? Note therefore that these divisions are deserted
by the persons the divisions were made about; neither Paul, nor
Apollos, nor Cephas, nor Christ is here. Let the cry be never so
loud, Christ, order, the rule, the command, or the like; carnality
is but the bottom, and they are but babes that do it; their zeal
is but a puff (1 Cor 4:6). And observe it, the great division at
Corinth, was helped forward by water baptism: this the apostle intimates
by, 'Were ye baptized in the name of Paul?' Ah, brethren! Carnal
Christians with outward circumstances, will, if they be let alone,
make sad work in the churches of Christ, against the spiritual
growth of the same. But 'I thank God,' saith Paul, 'that I baptized
none of you,' &c. Not but that it was then an ordinance of God,
but they abused it, in making parties thereby. 'I baptized none
of you, but Crispus and Gaius,--and the household of Stephanus':
men of note among the brethren, men of good judgment, and reverenced
by the rest; they can tell you I intended not to make a party to
myself thereby. 'Besides, I know not whether I baptized any other.'
By this negligent relating, who were baptized by him; he showeth
that he made no such matter of baptism, as some in these days do;
nay, that he made no matter at all thereof, with respect to church
communion; for if he did not heed who himself had baptized; he much
less heeded, who were baptized by others; but if baptism had been
the initiating, or entering ordinance, and so appointed of God;
no doubt he had made more conscience thereof, than so lightly to
pass it over. 'For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach
the gospel.' The gospel then may be effectually preached, and
yet baptism neither administered nor mentioned. The gospel being
good tidings to sinners, upon the account of free grace through
Christ; but baptism with things of like nature, are duties enjoined
such a people who received the gospel before. I speak not this,
because I would teach men to break the least of the commandments
of God; but to persuade my brethren of the baptized way, not to
hold too much thereupon, not to make it an essential of the gospel
of Christ, nor yet of communion of saints.

'He sent me not to baptize': these words are spoken with holy
indignation against them that abuse this ordinance of Christ. So
when he speaketh of the ministers themselves, which also they had
abused; in his speaking, he as it were trampleth upon them, as if
they were nothing at all. 'Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos?'
'He that planteth is not any thing, neither is he that watereth,
but God that giveth the increase' (1 Cor 3:5,7). Yet for all this,
the ministers and their ministry are a glorious appointment of
God in the world. Baptism also is a holy ordinance, but when Satan
abuseth it, and wrencheth it out of its place; making that which
was ordained of God for the edification of believers, the only
weapon to break in pieces the love, the unity, the concord of
saints; then What is baptism? then neither is baptism anything.
And this is no new doctrine; for God by the mouth of his prophets
of old, cried out against his own institutions, when abused by
his people: 'To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices
unto me,' saith the LORD: 'I am full of the burnt-offerings of
rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood
of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats. When ye come to appear
before me, who hath required this at your hands, to tread my
courts? Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination
to me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies,
I cannot away with it; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting.
Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are
a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them' (Isa 1:11-14). And
yet all these were his own appointments. But why then did he thus
abhor them? Because they retained the evil of their doings, and
used them as they did other of his appointments, viz., 'For strife
and debate, and to strike with the fist of wickedness' (58:4):
Wherefore when that of God that is great, is overweighed by that
which is small; it is the wisdom of them that see it, to put load
to the other end of the scale; until the things thus abused, poise
in their own place. But to pass this and proceed.

Ninth, If we shall reject visible saints by calling saints that
have communion with God, that have received the law at the hand of
Christ, that are of an holy conversation among men; they desiring
to have communion with us, as much as in us lieth, we take from
them their very privileges, and the blessings to which they were
born of God. For Paul saith not only to the gathered church at
Corinth, but to all scattered saints that in every place call upon
the name of the Lord; That Jesus Christ is theirs, That Paul, and
Apollos, and the world, and life, and death, and all things are
theirs, because they are Christ's, and Christ is God's. But saith
he, let no man glory in men, such as Paul and Cephas, though these
were excellent: because this privilege comes to you upon another
bottom, even by faith of Jesus Christ, 'Drink you all of this,' is
entailed to faith, not baptism: nay, baptized persons may yet be
excluded this; when he that discerneth the Lord's body hath right
and privilege to it (1 Cor 11:28,29). But to exclude Christians from
church communion and to debar them their heaven-born privileges,
for the want of that which yet God never made a wall of division
between us.

(1.) This looks too like a spirit of persecution (Job 19:28). (2.)
It respecteth more a form, than the spirit and power of godliness
(2 Tim 3:5). (3.) This is to make laws, where God hath made none,
and to be wise above what is written, contrary to God's word, and
our own principles. (4.) It is a directing of the Spirit of God.
(5.) It bindeth all men's faith and light to mine opinion. (6.) It
taketh away the children's bread. (7.) It withholdeth from them
the increase of faith. (8.) It tendeth to harden the hearts of
the wicked. (9.) It tendeth to make wicked the hearts of weak
Christians. (10.) It setteth open a door to all temptations. (11.)
It tempteth the devil to fall upon those that are alone, and have
none to help them. (12.) It is the nursery of all vain janglings,
back-bitings, and strangeness among the Christians. (13.) It
occasioneth the world to reproach us. (14.) It holdeth staggering
consciences, in doubt of the right way of the Lord. (15.) It giveth
occasion to many to turn aside to most dangerous heresies. (16.)
It abuseth the holy scriptures; It wresteth God's ordinances out
of their place. (17.) It is a prop to antichrist. (18.) Shall I
add, Is it not that which greatly prevailed to bring down these
judgments, which at present we feel and groan under;[18] I will
dare to say, it was[19] a cause thereof.

Tenth, and lastly, Bear with one word farther. What greater
contempt can be thrown upon the saints than for their brethren to
cast them off, or to debar them church communion? Think you not
that the world may groundly say, Some great iniquity lies hid in
the skirts of your brethren; when in truth the transgression is
yet your own? But I say, what can the church do more to the sinners
or open profane? Civil commerce you will have with the worst, and
what more have you with these? Perhaps you will say we can pray and
preach with these; and hold them Christians, saints, and godly.
Well, but let me ask you one word farther: Do you believe, that
of very conscience they cannot consent, as you, to that of water
baptism? And that if they had light therein, they would as willingly
do it as you? Why then, as I have shewed you, our refusal to hold
communion with them is without a ground from the word of God. But
can you commit your soul to their ministry, and join with them in
prayer; and yet not count them meet for other gospel privileges?
I wold know by what scripture you do it? Perhaps you will say, I
commit not my soul to their ministry, only hear them occasionally
for trial. If this be all the respect thou hast for them and their
ministry, thou mayest have as much for the worst that pisseth
against the wall. But if thou canst hear them as God's ministers,
and sit under their ministry as God's ordinance; then shew me where
God hath such a gospel ministry, as that the persons ministering
may not, though desiring it, be admitted with you to the closest
communion of saints. But if thou sittest under their ministry for
fleshly politic ends, thou hearest the word like an atheist, and
art thyself, while thou judgest thy brother, in the practice of
the worst of men. But I say, where do you find this piece-meal
communion with men that profess faith and holiness as you, and
separation from the world. If you object, that my principles lead
me to have communion with all; I answer with all as afore described;
if they will have communion with me.

Object. Then you may have communion with the members of antichrist.

Ans. If there be a visible saint yet remaining in that church;
let him come to us, and we will have communion with him.

Quest. What, though he yet stand a member of that sinful number,
and profess himself one of them.

Ans. You suppose an impossibility; for it cannot be that, at the
same time, a man should visibly stand a member of two bodies
diametrically opposite one to another. Wherefore it must be supposed,
that he who professeth himself a member of a church of Christ,
must forthwith, nay before, forsake the antichristian one. The
which if he refuseth to do, it is evident he doth not sincerely
desire to have fellowship with the saints.

[Quest.] But he saith he cannot see that that company to which
you stand opposite, and conclude antichristian, is indeed the
antichristian church.

[Ans.] If so, he cannot desire to join with another, if he know
them to be professedly and directly opposite. I hold therefore
to what I said at first; That if there be any saints in the
antichristian church, my heart, and the door of our congregation
is open to receive them, into closest fellowship with us.

Object. But how if they yet retain some antichristian principles.

Ans. If they be such as eat out the bowels of a church, so soon as
they are detected he must either be kept out, while out, or cast
out, if in: for it must be the prudence of every community to
preserve its own unity with peace and truth: the which the churches
of Christ may do; and yet as I have shewed already, receive such
persons as differ upon the point of water baptism. For the doing
or not doing of that neither maketh nor marreth the bowels or
foundation of church communion.

Object. But this is receiving for opinion sake; as before you said
of us.

Ans. No; we receive him for the sake of Christ, and grace, and
for our mutual edification in the faith; and that we respect
not opinions, I mean in lesser matters, 'tis evident; for things
wherein we differ are no breach of communion among us; we let
every man have his own faith in such things to himself before God.


I NOW COME TO A SHORT APPLICATION.

I. Keep a strict separation, I pray you, from communion with the
open profane; and let not man use his liberty in church relation
as an occasion to the flesh; but in love serve one another. 'Looking
diligently--lest any root of bitterness--[any poisonful herb (Deut
29:18)] spring up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled' (Heb
12:15). And let those that before were reasons for my separation,
be motives to you to maintain the like: and remember that when
men have said what they can for a sinful mixture in the worship
of God; the arm of the Lord is made bare against it.

II. In the midst of your zeal for the Lord, remember that the
visible saint is his; and is privileged in all those spiritual
things that you have in the word and live in the practice of, and
that he is to partake thereof, according to his light therein.
Quarrel not with him about things that are circumstantial; but
receive him in the Lord, as becometh saints: if he will not have
communion with you, the neglect is his, not yours. But saith
the open profane, why cannot we be reckoned saints also? We have
been christened, we go to church, we take the communion.[20] Poor
people! This will not do; for so long as in life and conversation
you appear to be open profane, we cannot, unless we sin, receive
you into our fellowship: for by your ungodly lives you shew that
you know not Christ; and while you are such by the word, you are
reputed but beasts: now then judge yourselves, if it be not a
strange community that consisteth of men and beasts: let beasts
be with the beasts, you know yourselves do so; you receive not
your horse nor your hog to your table, you put them in a room by
themselves. Besides I have shewed you before, that for many reasons
we cannot have communion with you.

(1.) The church of God must be holy (Lev 11:44, 19:2, 20:7; 1
Peter 1:15,16; Isa 26:2; Psa 118:20; Eze 43:12, 44:9; Isa 52:11).

(2.) The example of the churches of Christ before, hath been a
community of visible saints (Rom 1:7; 1 Cor 1:2; Eph 1:1; Col
1:2; 1 Thess 1:1; 2 Thess 1:1-5). Poor carnal man, there are many
other reasons urged in this little book, that shew why we cannot
have communion with thee: not that we refuse of pride or stoutness,
or because we scorn you as men. No, we pity you, and pray to God
for you; and could, if you were converted, with joy receive you
to fellowship with us: Did you never read in Daniel, That iron
is not mixed with miry clay? (2:43). No more can the saints with
you, in the worship of God, and fellowship of the gospel, When
those you read of in the fourth of Ezra, attempted to join in temple
work with the children of the captivity; what said the children
of Judah? 'Ye have nothing to do with us to build an house unto
our God; but we ourselves together will build unto the Lord God
of Israel,' &c (Eze 4:3).

I return now to those that are visible saints by calling, that
stand at a distance one from another, upon the accounts before
specified: Brethren; CLOSE; CLOSE; be one, as the Father in Christ
is one.

1. This is the way to convince the world that you are Christ's,
and the subjects of one Lord; whereas the contrary makes them
doubt it (John 13:34,35, 17:23). 2. This is the way to increase
love; that grace so much desired by some, and so little enjoyed
by others (2 Cor 7:15). 3. This is the way to savour and taste
the Spirit of God in each other's experience; for which if you
find it in truth you cannot but bless, if you be saints, the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ (1 Thess 1:2-4). 4. This is the way to
increase knowledge, or to see more in the word of God: for that
may be known by two; that is not seen by one (Isa 52:8). 5. This
is the way to remove secret jealousies and murmurings one against
the other: yea this is the way to prevent much sin, and greatly
to frustrate that design of hell (Prov 6:16-19). 6. This is the
way to bring them out of the world into fellowship that now stand
off from our gospel privileges, for the sake of our vain janglings.
7. This is the way to make antichrist shake, totter, and tremble
(Isa 11:13,14). 8. This is the way to leave Babylon as an habitation
for devils only; and to make it a hold for foul spirits, and a
cage only for every unclean and hateful bird. 9. This is the way
to hasten the work of Christ's kingdom in the world; and to forward
his coming to the eternal judgment. 10. And this is the way to
obtain much of that, WELL DONE, GOOD AND FAITHFUL SERVANT, when
you stand before his face. [In the words of Paul] 'I beseech you,
brethren, suffer the word of exhortation: for I have written a
letter unto you in a few words' (Heb 13:22).


FOOTNOTES:

1. It is much to be regretted that these books, in common withall
Mr. Bunyan's Works, were grossly corrupted in the text in all the
editions published since 1737,--'poor peace indeed,' was changed
to 'pure peace indeed'; 'here is Rome enough,' meaning popery
enough, was altered to 'here is room enough'; 'Baptist,' was
printed 'Papist,' &c., &c.: all the typographical errors have now
been carefully corrected by Bunyan's editions.

2. Reply to Kinghorn. 1818, p. xii.

3. King Charles the 2nd, about a year after this time, pardoned
near five hundred Quakers, who had been languishing in prison for
not attending the church service. Upon this Mr. Bunyan, and his
fellow prisoners at Bedford, petitioned for liberty, and at a
court of privy council at Whitehall, the 17th May, 1672, present,
the King and twenty-four of his councillors, the following minute
was made:--'Whereas, by order of the Board of the 8th instant,
the humble petition of John Penn, John Bunyan, John Dunn, Thomas
Haynes, Simon Haynes, and George Parr, prisoners in the goale of
Bedford, convicted upon several statutes for not conforming to
the rights and ceremonyes of the church of England, and for being
at unlawful meetings, was referred to the Sheriff of the county
of Bedford, who was required to certify this Board whether the
said persons were committed for the crimes in the said petition
mentioned, AND FOR NO OTHER; which he having accordingly done,
by his certificate dated the 11th instant. It was thereupon, this
day, ordered by his Ma(tie) in council, That the said petition and
certificate be (and are herewith) sent to his Ma(tie's) Attorney
General, who is authorized, and required, to insert them into the
general pardon to be passed for the Quakers.' This fully confirms
what Bunyan says as to the cause of his long and dangerous
imprisonment. It was for being absent from the state church and
worshipping God according to His will, as expressed in the Bible.
See Introduction to Pilgrim's Progress, Hansard Knollys edition.

4. 'To ascertain us,' in the 17th century meant 'to make us
confident,' 'to assure us.' 'It ascertaining me that I am one of
God's children.'--Hammond. Ed.

5. Eternal blessings on our Emmanuel, who faithfully performed
His promise of sending the Comforter to unlock the mysteries of
the kingdom of grace, and guide us into all truth: without His
powerful aid we can neither know or perform any thing to a good
or saving purpose.--Mason.

6. The gracious soul believes in Christ for justification, from
a sense of utter inability to obtain justification by works. This
is effected by the power of the Holy Spirit, the glorifier of
Jesus.--Mason.

7. Effectual calling is evidenced by the soul's love to God, in
his dear Son; a superior delight in Him, as a reconciled Father,
cleaving to Him, His ways, and people; and longing for the full
fruition and final enjoyment of Him in glory.--Mason.

8. How great is the delight of meeting in a foreign country, after
a long absence from home, with one who speaks your own language
and sympathizes with your national feelings. How much more strong
are those enjoyments arising from the communion of saints, while
travelling through an enemy's country, with difficult duties
to perform,--animated by a kindred spirit, and seeking the same
eternal home.--Ed.

9. The despising and disregarding the Holy Scriptures, rejecting
Jesus and the way of salvation by Him, especially after having
attained to the knowledge and conviction of the truth of it by
the gospel, is the unpardonable sin, and renders men obdurate and
impenitent.--Mason.

10. How strongly must have been the principle of humble submission
to the will of God implanted and rooted in Bunyan's mind. He writes
this peaceful advice from his dungeon, after twelve years' cruel
imprisonment for his love and obedience to the Saviour. It requires
a holy flame of Divine love to enable us to take the spoiling of
our goods joyfully; but how much more strongly must this principle
pervade the heart to enable us to suffer the loss of liberty,
deprived of the society of a much loved wife and family, and in
daily fear of an ignominious death! We cannot sufficiently admire
the grace of God in the sufferer, nor abhor the tyranny under
which he suffered.--Ed.

11. This idea is found in other of Bunyan's Works. Certainly the
mixture of saints and sinners in a national church established for
worldly purposes, must engender hypocrisy and pride, intolerance
and persecution. Such leaders in Satan's army were calculated
mightily to assist, if they were not the original cause, of the
overspreading of sin which called forth the flood to wash away.--Ed.

12. Bishop Hall describes a Christian indeed as 'having white hands
and a clean soul, fit to lodge God in; all the rooms whereof are
set apart for his holiness.'--Ed.

13. Submission to the disciples of a Christian church must be
voluntary, and not by the constraint of force or hypocrisy. In
Christ's church ALL must be free, and not a mixture of free-men
and the slaves of sin.--Ed.

14. What faithfulness and plain dealing is here. If any church
communicates with the profane it is offering sacrifice to the
devil.--Ed.

15. One of the most touching scenes in the Pilgrim's Progress
beautifully illustrates this fact. When Christian led Hopeful
into Bye-path Meadow, so that they fell into the hands of Giant
Despair, Hopeful says, 'I wold have spoke plainer, but that you
are older than I.' That whole scene manifests the most delicate
sensibility and christian feeling.--Ed.

16. How strange that pious men should have been prone to punish
their fellows for non-conformity in an outward sign. They themselves
were suffering inconceivable miseries under acts of uniformity in
rites and ceremonies. How applicable to the framers of such acts
of parliament are our Lord's words, 'Woe unto you, pharisees, who
whiten and garnish the outside of a sepulchre, while within it is
full of uncleanness, hypocrisy, and iniquity' (Matt 23).--Ed.

17. 'An implicit faith'; faith in things without inquiry, or in
things not expressed.--Ed.

18. 'These judgments we feel and groan under.' So frightful were
the persecutions of the dissenters by the church in 1670, that
the narrative says, 'The town [of Bedford] was so thin of people,
and the shops shut down, that it seemed like a place visited with
the pest, where usually is written upon the door, "Lord, have
mercy upon us."' Had the dissenters been united, the church would
not have dared to exercise such barbarities--men and women in
jails--some hanged for not going to church--all their goods swept
away, and their children perishing.--Ed.

19. The printer had inserted 'the cause'; Bunyan's manuscript was
'a cause.' See marginal note, in his Differences in Judgment.--Ed.

20. This is a much more extensive evil than many would credit. I
have met with these very expressions not only among the poor but
the rich. It is an awful delusion.--Ed.

***

DIFFERENCES IN JUDGMENT ABOUT WATER BAPTISM, NO BAR TO COMMUNION:
OR, TO COMMUNICATE WITH SAINTS, AS SAINTS, PROVED LAWFUL.

IN ANSWER TO A BOOK WRITTEN BY THE BAPTISTS, AND PUBLISHED BY MR.
T. PAUL AND MR. W. KIFFIN, ENTITLED, 'SOME SERIOUS REFLECTIONS
ON THAT PART OF MR BUNYAN'S CONFESSION OF FAITH, TOUCHING CHURCH
COMMUNION WITH UNBAPTIZED BELIEVERS.'

WHEREIN THEIR OBJECTIONS AND ARGUMENTS ARE ANSWERED, AND THE DOCTRINE
OF COMMUNION STILL ASSERTED AND VINDICATED. HERE IS ALSO MR. HENRY
JESSE'S JUDGMENT IN THE CASE, FULLY DECLARING THE DOCTRINE I HAVE
ASSERTED.

BY JOHN BUNYAN.

'Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man
full of talk be justified? should thy lies make men hold their
peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee an
answer [unashamed?]'--Job 11:2, 3

London: Printed for John Wilkins, and are to be sold at his shop
in Exchange Alley, next door to the Exchange Coffee House, over
against the Royal Exchange, 1673.



Courteous Reader,

Be intreated to believe me, I had not set pen to paper about this
controversy, had we been let alone at quiet in our Christian
communion. But being assaulted for more than sixteen years, wherein
the brethren of the baptized way, as they had their opportunity,
have sought to break us in pieces, merely because we are not, in
their way, all baptized first: I could not, I durst not, forbear
to do a little, if it might be, to settle the brethren, and to
arm them against the attempts, which also of late they begin to
revive upon us. That I deny the ordinance of baptism, or that
I have placed one piece of an argument against it, though they
feign it, is quite without colour of truth. All I say is, That the
church of Christ hath not warrant to keep out of their communion
the Christian that is discovered to be a visible saint by the
word, the Christian that walketh according to his light with God.
I will not make reflections upon those unhandsome brands that my
brethren have laid upon me for this, as that I am a machivilian,
a man devilish, proud, insolent, presumptuous, and the like,
neither will I say as they, The Lord rebuke thee; Words fitter
to be spoken to the devil than a brother. But reader, read and
compare; lay aside prejudice and judge. What Mr. Kiffin hath done
in the matter I forgive, and love him never the worse, but must
stand by my principles because they are peaceable, godly, profitable,
and such as tend to the edification of my brother, and as I believe
will be justified in the day of judgment.

I have also here presented thee with the opinion of Mr. Henry Jesse,
in the case, which providentially I met with as I was coming to
London to put my papers to the press; and that it was his judgment
is asserted to me, known many years since to some of the Baptists,
to whom it was sent, but never yet answered; and will yet be
attested if need shall require. Farewell.

Thine in all Christian service, according to my light and power,

JOHN BUNYAN.



DIFFERENCES IN JUDGMENT ABOUT WATER BAPTISM, NO BAR TO COMMUNION.


Sir,

Your seemingly serious reflections upon that part of my plain-hearted
confession of faith, which rendereth a reason of my freedom
to communicate with those of the saints and faithful who differ
from me about water baptism; I have read and considered, and have
weighed them so well as my rank and abilities will admit me to
do. But finding yours, if I mistake not, far short of a candid
replication, I thought [it] convenient, not only to tell you of those
impertinencies everywhere scattered up and down in your book; but
also, that in my simple opinion, your rigid and church-disquieting
principles are not fit for any age and state of the church.

But before I enter the body of your book, give me leave a little
to discourse you about your preamble to the same, wherein are two
miscarriages unworthy your pretended seriousness, because void of
love and humility. The first is, In that you closely disdain my
person because of my low descent among men, stigmatising me for a
person of THAT rank, that need not to be heeded or attended unto.[1]

Ans. What it is that gives a man reverence with you, I know not;
but for certain. He that despiseth the poor reproacheth his Maker;
yet, 'a poor man is better than a liar.' To have gay clothing, or
gold rings, or the persons that wear them in admiration; or to be
partial in your judgment, or respects, for the sake, or upon the
account of, flesh and blood, doubtless convicteth you to be of
the law a transgressor, and not without partiality, &c., in the
midst of your seeming sanctity.

Again, you say, 'I had not meddled with the controversy at all, had
I found any of parts that would divert themselves to take notice
of YOU.'

Ans. What need you, before you have shewed one syllable of a
reasonable argument in opposition to what I assert, thus trample
my person, my gifts, and grace, have I any, so disdainfully under
your feet? What kind of a YOU am I?[2] And why is MY rank so
mean, that the most gracious and godly among you, may not duly
and soberly consider of what I have said? Was it not the art of
the false apostles of old to say thus? To bespatter a man, that
his doctrine might be disregarded. 'Is not this the carpenter?'
And, 'His bodily presence is weak and his speech contemptible'
(1 Cor 10:10), did not use to be in the mouths of the saints; for
they knew that 'the wind bloweth where it listeth' (John 3:8).
Neither is it high birth, worldly breeding, or wealth; but electing
love, grace, and the wisdom that comes from heaven, that those
who strive for strictness of order in the things and kingdom of
Christ, should have in regard and esteem (James 3:17). Need I read
you a lecture? 'Hath not God chosen the foolish,--the weak,--the
base, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things
that are?' (1 Cor 1:27,28). Why then do you despise my rank, my
state, and quality in the world?

As for my confession of faith, which you also secretly despise.
If it be good and godly, why may it not be accepted? If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou
me? If you, and the brethren of your way, did think it convenient
to shew to the world what you held; if perhaps by that means you
might escape the person: why might not I, after above eleven years'
endurance there, give the world a view of my faith and practice;
if peradventure, wrong thoughts, and false judgments of me, might
by that means be abated, and removed. But you suggest; I did it,
because I was so willing to be known in the world by my SINGULAR
faith and practice.[3] How singular my faith and practice is, may
be better known to you hereafter: but that I did it for a popular
applause and fame, as your words seem to bear, for they proceed
from a taunting spirit, that will be known to you better in the
day of God, when your evil surmises of your brother, and my designs
in writing my book, will be published upon the house-tops (Luke
12:1-4).

And even now, before I go any further, I will give you a touch of
the reason of my publishing that part thereof which you so hotly
oppose. It was because of those continual assaults that the rigid
brethren of your way, made, not only upon this congregation, to
rend it; but also upon many others about us. If peradventure they
might break us in pieces, and draw from us disciples after them.
Assaults, I say, upon this congregation by times, for no less than
these sixteen or eighteen years. Yea, myself they have sent for,
and endeavoured to persuade me to break communion with my brethren;
also with many others they have often tampered, if haply their
seeds of division might take. Neither did they altogether fail of
their purpose, for some they did rend and dismember from us; but
none but those, of whom now they begin to be ashamed. The judgment
of God so following their design, that the persons which then
they prevailed upon, are now a stink, and reproach to religion.
Neither were these spirits content with that discord they did sow
among us, but they proceeded to seize upon others. But to pass
these. The wild, and unsound positions they have urged to maintain
their practice, would be too large here to insert. Now, Sir, to
settle the brethren, the brethren of our community, and to prevent
such disorders among others, was the cause of my publishing my
papers: and considering my concern in the house of God, I could do
no less than to give them warning, 'That every man might deliver
his soul.'

You proceed, saying, 'It is my liberty, as well as others into whose
hands it falls, to weigh what you have said in truth's balance,
and if it be found too light, to reject it whether you will or
no.'

Ans. Do but grant me, without mocking of me, the liberty you desire
to take, and God helping me, I desire no more [than] to shift for
myself among you. As to your saying, that I proudly and imperiously
insult, because I say they are 'babes and carnal, that attempt
to break the peace and communion of churches, though upon better
pretences than water.' You must know I am still of that mind, and
shall be, so long as I see the effects that follow, viz. The breach
of love, taking off Christians from the more weighty things of
God; and to make them quarrel and have heart-burnings one against
another.

Where you are pleased to charge me with raging, for laying those
eighteen particular crimes to the charge of such who exclude
Christians from church communion, and debar them their heaven-born
privileges, for the want of that, which yet God never made the
wall of division between us. I say, when you can prove, That God
hath made water baptism that wall, and that the stress of the after
eighteen charges lie wholly and only in that; then you may, time
enough, call my language such as wanteth charity: but I question
though that was granted, whether your saying, I RAGE, will be
justified in the day of judgment.

My great noise, as you call it, about an initiating ordinance,
you say, you shall take no notice of.

Ans. 1. Although you do not, I must: For if baptism be not that,
but another; and if visible saints may enter into fellowship by
that other, and are nowhere forbidden so to do, because they have
not light into water baptism: it is of weight to be considered by
me; yea, and of others too who are unprejudiced. 2. How ignorant
you are of such as hold it the initiating ordinance I know not:
nor how long you have been of that persuasion I know not. This I
know, that men of your own party, as serious, godly, and it may be,
more learned than yourself, have within less than this twelve-month
urged it. Mr. D. in my hearing, did from Romans 6:1, 2 in the
meeting in Lothbury affirm it: also my much esteemed Mr. D. A.[4]
did twice in a conference with me assert it. 3. But whatever you
say, whether for, or against, 'tis no matter; for while you deny
it be the entering ordinance, you account it the wall, bar, bolt,
and door; even that which must separate between the righteous
and the righteous; nay, you make want of light therein, a ground
to exclude the most godly your communion, when every novice in
religion shall be received into your bosom, and be of esteem with
you because he hath, and from what ground God knows, submitted to
water baptism.

I am glad that you conclude with me what is the initiating ordinance:
but withal, give me leave to correct, as I think, one extravagant
expression of yours. You say, 'It is CONSENT on all hands and
NOTHING else, that makes them members of particular churches, and
not faith and baptism.' You might have stopped at, and nothing
else, you need not in particular have rejected faith: your first
error was bad enough: what, NOTHING else but consent? What, not so
much as a respect to the matter or end? Why then are not all the
communities of all the highwaymen in the land, truly constituted
churches of Christ; unless you can prove that they hold together,
but not by consent? What? consent and nothing else? But why do
YOU throw out FAITH? why, I throw out baptism; which because you
cannot as to the case in hand fetch in again, therefore out must
faith go too. Your action is much like that harlot's, that stood
to be judged by Solomon, who because her own child was dead, would
have her neighbour's killed also (1 Kings 3:26). Faith, Sir, both
in the profession and confession of it, is of immediate and also
absolute concern, even in the very act of the church's reception,
of this or another member. Throw out faith, and there is no such
thing as a Christian, neither visible nor invisible. You ought
to receive no man, but upon a comfortable satisfaction to the
church, that you are now receiving a believer. Faith, whether it
be savingly there or no, is the great argument with the church in
receiving any: we receive not men as men, but the man immediately
under that supposition; He hath faith, he is a Christian. Sir,
consent simply, without faith, makes no man a member of the church
of God: because then would a church not cease to be a church,
whoever they received among them. Yea, by this assertion you have
justified the church of Rome itself, to be to this day both good,
and godly, unless you can prove that they did at first, and do
now receive their unbelieving members, without their own consent.
The church hath no such liberty to receive men without respect to
faith; yea, faith and holiness must be the essentials, or basis,
upon, and for the sake of which you receive them: holiness, I say,
yet not such as is circumstantial, but that which is such in the
very heart of it: pray you in your next therefore word it better,
lest while you slight and trample upon me, you stand before all,
blame-worthy yourself.

The scriptures you speak of, I did not in my first produce to
shew persons unbaptized [in water] might hold communion with the
church, though I am fully convinced they may, but to shew, that
knowledge of those persons, of their faith and holiness in general,
ought first to be shewed to the church, before she can lawfully
receive them (Acts 9:26-31; 1 Cor 16:10; 2 Cor 8:23). As to
my answer to a question which you have of your's corrupted, and
then abused: I tell you again, That a discovery of the faith and
holiness, and a declaration of the willingness of a person to subject
himself to the laws and government of Christ in his church, is a
ground sufficient to receive such a member.

But you descant; Is baptism one of the laws of Christ?

Ans. It is none of those laws, neither any part of them, that the
church, as a church, should shew her obedience by. For albeit that
baptism be given by Christ our Lord to the church, yet not for
them to worship him by as a church. Shew me what church-ordinance
it is; and when, or where the church, as a church, is to practise
it, as one of those laws and appointments that he hath commanded
his church to shew to him her obedience by. Again, That submitting
to water baptism, is a sign or note, that was ever required by
any of the primitive churches, of him that would hold fellowship
with them; or that it infuseth such grace and holiness into those
that submit thereto, as to capacitate them for such a privilege;
or that they did acknowledge it a sign thereof, I find not in all
the Bible.

I find not, as I told you in my first, that baptism is a sign to
any, but the person that is baptized (Col 2:12; Rom 6:1-4; 1 Cor
15:29; Acts 2:38, 22:16). The church hath her satisfaction of the
person, from better proof (1 Peter 3:21).

I told you also, That baptism makes thee no member of the church,
neither doth it make thee a visible saint: It giveth thee therefore,
neither right to, nor being of membership at all. Why, Sir, did you
not answer these things? but slip them with others, as if you were
unconcerned; troubling your reader with such kind of insinuations,
as must needs be unsavoury to godly ears. You make the moral law
none of Christ's but Moses'; not the son's but the servant's; and
tell me, because I plead for faith and holiness, according to moral
duties gospelized, (they are my words) whereby we ought to judge
of the fitness of members; that therefore Moses is more beholden
to me than Christ.

Sir, know you not yet, that a difference is to be put betwixt
those rules that discover the essentials of holiness, and those
that in themselves are not such; and that that of faith and the
moral law is the one, and baptism, &c. the other. Is not love to
God, abhorrence of idols, to forbear blaspheming, to honour our
parents, to do no murder, to forbear theft, not to bear false
witness, nor covet, &c. are not (I say) these the precepts of the
Lord Jesus, because delivered by Moses? Or, are these such as may
better be broken, than for want of light to forbear baptism with
water? Or, doth a man while he liveth in the neglect of these,
and in the mean time bustle about those you call gospel commands,
most honour Christ, or best fit himself for fellowship with the
saints? Need I tell you, That the faith of Christ, with the ten
commandments, are as much now gospel commands as baptism; and
ought to be in as much, and far more respect with the holy ones
than that, or other the like.[5]

Yea, shall I tell you, That baptism will neither admit a man into
fellowship, nor keep him there, if he be a transgressor of a moral
precept; and that a man who believeth in Jesus, and fulfilleth
the royal law, doth more glorify God, and honour religion in the
world, than he that keepeth, if there were so many, ten thousand
figurative laws. As to those commands that respect God's instituted
worship in a church, as a church, I have told you that baptism is
none of them, and you have been driven to confess it. The church
then must first look to faith, then to good living according to the
ten commandments; after that she must respect those appointments
of our Lord Jesus that respects her outward order and discipline,
and then she walks as becomes her, sinning if she neglecteth
either; sinning if she overvalueth either. But why did you not
answer those tests I produced for the strengthening of my argument
(Rom 14:17,18; Deut 27:47; James 2:8-12; 1 Cor 9:21, 5:9-11; Gal
6:15,16; Phil 3; 1 Tim 1:9-11; Acts 20:28-32; Rom 13:13; James 4:11;
1 Cor 5:12). Deal fairly; Answer those texts, with the argument
made upon them; and when you have after a godly manner done that,
you may the more boldly condemn.

You tell me, that I say, 'None ever received baptism without light
therein.'

What if I did? (as I did not) but you grant it: and now I will ask
you, and pray deal fairly in your answer. May a man be a visible
saint without light therein? May he have a good conscience without
light therein? And seeing that baptism is none of the worship that
Christ instituted in his church for them to practice as a church,
must he be kept dark about all other things concerning the worship
of God in his church, until he receive light therein?

You have answered already, 'That they ought to be ashamed, and
to repent of that abomination [their sprinkling] BEFORE they come
to have a sight of the pattern of the house of God, the goings
in and the comings out thereof' (Eze 43:10,11). But, Sir, where
do you find that want of light in water baptism, or because a
man hath been sprinkled, that he is to be kept dark in all other
temple-institutions, till he be ashamed and repent of that? Pray
produce the texts, for Ezekiel helps you nothing: he speaks only
of the pattern of the house, the goings out, and comings in thereof.
As for the coming in, you have already confessed, That baptism is
not the entering ordinance. And as for the worship that Christ
hath instituted in his church, as a church, I say, (and you also
have said it) baptism is none of the forms thereof, none of the
ordinances thereof, none of the laws thereof; for baptism is, as
to the practice of it, that which is without the church, without
the house of God.[6] Then by your own text, if a man do repent
him of his christening in his childhood, he may be received into
fellowship without submitting to baptism: but I will not strain
you too far.

You add, 'Is it a person's light that giveth being to a precept?'

Ans. Who said it? Yet it is his light and faith about it, that
can make him to do it acceptably.

You ask again, 'Suppose men plead want of light in other commands?'

Ans. If they be not such, the forbearance of which, discapacitates
him of membership, he may yet be received to fellowship.

'But what if a man want light in the supper?'

Ans. There is more to be said in that case than in the other: for
that is a part of that worship which Christ hath instituted for
his church, to be conversant in as a church; presenting them as
such, with their communion with their Head, and with one another
as members of him. 'The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not
the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many
are one bread, and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread' (1 Cor 10:16,17). Wherefore this being a duty incumbent
on the church, as a church; and on every member of that body as
such, they are obliged in that case more closely to deal with the
members, than in that wherein they are not so concerned; and with
which as such, they have nothing to do. No man baptizeth by virtue
of his office in the church; no man is baptized by virtue of his
membership there.

'But what if a man want light in his duty to the poor?'

Ans. If he doth, God must give it him; I mean to know his duty
as a church member. Now I will add, but what if he that can give
a shilling, giveth nothing? I suppose all that the church can do
in that case, is but to warn, to exhort, and charge him, and to
shew him his duty: and if he neglect, to shew him, that 'He which
soweth sparingly, shall reap also sparingly' (2 Cor 9:6). But to
cut a man off for this, as you forwardly urge, would argue that
church, at least I think so, a little too bold with so high and
weighty a censure. I plead not here for the churl, but seek to
allay your heat: and should it be granted that such deserve as
you would have it, this makes no matter to the case in hand. Now
whereas you suggest, 'That moral evils are but sins against men,'
you are too much unadvised: the moral evil, as you call it,
whether you respect the breach of the first or second table, is
first and immediately a sin against God; and more insufferable, yea
and damnable, than for a man for want of light to forbear either
baptism or the Lord's Supper.

But say you, 'We have now found an advocate for sin against God,
in the breach of one of HIS holy commands?'

Ans. As if none of the moral precepts were HIS. But, Sir, who have
I pleaded for, in the denial of any one ordinance of God? Yea, or
for their neglect of it either? What I say, is but that men must
have light, that they may not do in darkness, or Papist-like, live
by an implicit faith.

But I see you put no difference between an open breach of the
law, and a forbearing that which to him is doubtful. But I will
suppose a case: There is a man wants light in baptism, yet by
his neighbour is pressed to it: he saith he seeth it not to be
his duty; the other saith, he sins if he doth it not: now seeing
'whatsoever is not of faith is sin' (Rom 14:23); what should this
man do? If you say, let him use the means: I say so too. But what,
if when he hath used it, he still continueth dark about it; what
will you advise him now? If you bid him wait, do you not encourage
him to live in sin, as much as I do? Nay, and seeing you will
not let him for want of light in that, obey God in other his
institutions; what is it but to say, Seeing you live for want
of light in the neglect of baptism, we will make you, while you
continue so, live, though quite against your light, in the breach
of all the rest. And WHERE you are commanded thus, you may shew
the place when you find it.

Now where you urge, that you are one of them that say, 'The epistles
were writ to particular churches, and so serve nothing at all for
our kind of communion.' Urging further, 'That it will be difficult
for me to prove, that they were also directed to particular saints.'

Ans. I wish there were nothing harder, that were good for me to
do. But what should be the reason that our author, with others
of his opinion, should stickle so hard to prove [that] all the
epistles were wrote to particular churches? Why, because those
members were, as they think, every one baptized; and so the epistles
from which we fetch our arguments for the love and concord of
saints, to be only proper to themselves.[7] But if this be true,
there is virtue indeed, and more than ever I dreamed of, in partaking
of water baptism: for if that shall take away the epistles, and
consequently the whole Bible, from all that are not baptized;
then are the other churches, and also particular saints, in a very
deplorable condition. For he asketh me very devoutly, 'Whether
any unbaptized persons were concerned in these epistles?' But why
would they take from us the Holy Scriptures? Verily, that we might
have naught to justify our practice withal: for if the Scriptures
belong only to baptized believers, they then belong not to the
rest; and in truth, if they could persuade us to yield them this
grant, we should but sorrily justify our practice. But I would ask
these men, 'If the word of God came out from them? Or if it came
to them only?' (1 Cor 14:36). Or, whether Christ hath not given his
whole word to every one that believeth, whether they be baptized,
or in, or out of church fellowship (James 17:14). Or, whether every
saint in some sort, hath not the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
which are the Scriptures and their power? Would to God they
had learned more modesty, than thus to take from all others, and
appropriate to themselves, and that for the sake of their observing
a circumstance in religion, so high, and glorious a privilege.

But we will come a little to proof: what church will this author
find in Rome, that time the epistle was sent to the brethren
there, besides that church that was in Aquila's house, although
many more saints were then in the city? (Rom 16:5). Yea, the
apostle in his salutation at the beginning, embraceth them only
as brethren, without the least intimation of their being gathered
into fellowship: 'To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called
to be saints: Grace to you,' &c. (1:7). To all there, to all
in that city, beloved of God, and that are converted to the Lord
Jesus Christ. A church there was in Aquila's house, and that
there were many more saints besides, is, and that by the text, as
manifest. Besides, considering the rules that are given them in
the 14th and 15th chapters about their receiving one another, doth
yet strongly suggest to me, that they were not yet in fellowship,
but as it were now about it, when Paul wrote his epistle to them.

The first epistle written to Corinth, was also wrote to all them
'that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord'
(1:2). But it will be hard work for our author to make it manifest,
that none in those days did call on the name of our Lord, but those
that were first baptized. The second epistle also, was not only
written to the church at Corinth, but also to 'all the saints which
were in all Achaia' (2 Cor 1:1). To the Galatians and Thessalonians
indeed, his salutation was only to the churches there: But the
three epistles before were as well to all other [saints]: As also
that to the Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians, in which the
faithful and SAINTS in Christ Jesus were also every one comprehended.
Besides, to what particular church was the epistle to the Hebrews
wrote? Or the epistle of James? Both those of Peter, and the first
of John? Nay, that of John was wrote to some at that time out of
fellowship, 'that also may have fellowship with [us]' the church
(1:1-4). So that these brethren must not have all the scriptures.
We have then a like privilege with all saints, to use the scriptures
for our godly edifying, and to defend ourselves thereby, from the
assaults of those that would make spoil of us. But to pass this,
and come to the next.

You object for that I said, 'If water baptism [as the circumstances
with which the church was pestered of old] trouble the peace, and
wound the consciences of the godly, dismember and break their
fellowships; it is, although an ordinance, for the present prudently
to be shunned.' At this (as I said) you object, and say, 'Did I
ever find baptism a pest or plague to churches? And did ever God
send an ordinance to be a pest and plague to his people?'

I answer: I said not that God did send it for any such end at all;
God's ordinances are none of this in themselves: nor if used as,
and for the end for which God sent them. But yet both baptism,
and the supper of the Lord, have, by being wrested out of their
place, been a great affliction to the godly both in this and
other ages. What say you to breaking of bread, which the devil, by
abusing, made an engine in the hand of Papists, to burn, starve,
hang and draw thousands? What say you to John of Leyden? What
work did he make by the abuse of the ordinance of water baptism?
And I wish this age had not given cause, through the church-rending
spirits that some are possessed with, to make complaint of this
matter; who have also had for their engine the baptism with water.
Yea, yourself, Sir, so far as I can perceive, could you get but
the opportunity; yourself (I say) under pretence of this innocent
ordinance, as you term it, would not stick to make inroads,
and outroads too, in all the churches, that suit not your fancy,
in the land. For you have already been bold to affirm, 'That all
those that have baptized infants, ought to be ashamed and repent,
before they be showed the pattern of the house.' And what is this
but to threaten, that could you have your will of them, you would
quickly take from them their present church privileges, and let
them see nothing thereof, till those qualifications, especially
subjection to water baptism, was found to attend each of them.

As to the persons you speak of, 'Who have rent churches in pieces,
by making preaching by method, doctrine, reason and use, to be
anti-christian': Or, because they could not have other ministrations
performed after their fancies 'the imprudence of such with yourselves,
hath been heart-breaking to many a gracious soul; an high occasion
of stumbling to the weak, and a reproach to the ways of the Lord.'
That it may be prudently shunned, I referred you then for proof,
to what should be offered after: but at this you cry out, and so
pass it.

And now, reader, although this author hath thus objected against
some passages in this my first argument for communion with persons
unbaptized; yet the body of my argument he misseth and passeth over,
as a thing not worth the answering; whether because he forgot, or
because he was conscious to himself, that he knew not what to do
therewith, I will not now determine. 1. I effectually prove, 'That
baptism is not the initiating ordinance.' 2. I prove, 'That though
it was, yet the case may so fall out, that members might be received
without it.' 3. I prove, 'That baptism makes no man a visible
saint, nor giveth any right to church fellowship.' 4. I prove,
'That faith, and a life becoming the law of the ten commandments,
should be the chief and most solid argument with true churches to
receive saints to fellowship.'[8] 5. I prove, 'That circumcision
in the flesh, which was the entering ordinance of old, was a type
of circumcision in the heart,' &c. These things, with others, our
author letteth pass; although in the proof of them abideth the
strength of this first argument; to which I must entreat him in
his next, to cast his eye, and give fair answer; as also to the
scriptures on which each are built, or he must suffer me to say,
I am abused. Further, I make a question upon three scriptures,
Whether all the saints, even in the primitive times, were baptized
with water? to which also he answereth nothing; whereas he ought
to have done it, if he will take in hand to confute. The scriptures
are 1 Corinthians 1:14-16; Romans 6:3; Galatians 3:27. Yet were
they effectually answered, my argument is nothing weakened.

You come to my second argument, drawn from Ephesians 4:4-6. Upon
which a little more now to enlarge, and then to take notice of
your objection. The apostle then in that fourth of the Ephesians,
exhorteth the church there 'with all lowliness and meekness, with
long suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavouring to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace' (vv 2,3). This
done, he presents them with such arguments, as might fasten his
exhortation to purpose upon them.

1. The first is, because the body is ONE; There is 'one body';
therefore they should not divide. For if the church of Christ be
a body, there ought not to be a rent or schism among them (1 Cor
12).

2. His second argument is, There is 'one spirit,' or one quickening
principle by which the body is made to live; for having asserted
before that Christ hath indeed a body, it was meet that he showed
also, that this body hath life, and motion. Now that life, being
none other, than that nourishment, or spirit of life, from which
'the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which
every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working of the
measure in every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying
of itself in love' (Eph 4:16). Now this spirit, being first, and
chiefly, in the head, therefore none other but those that hold the
head can have this nourishment ministered to them: besides, this
is the spirit that knits the body together, and makes it increase
with the increase of God (Col 2:19). This is 'the unity of the
spirit' which he before exhorts them to keep.

3. The third argument is, Because their hope is also but one. 'Even
as ye are called [saith he] in one hope of your calling': as who
should say, My brethren, if you are called with one calling, if
your hope, both as to the grace of hope, and also the object, be
but one: if you hope for one heaven, and for one eternal life:
then maintain that unity of the spirit, and hope, while here, in
love, 'and the bond of peace' (Eph 4:3).

4. The fourth argument is, There is 'one Lord,' or husband, or prince,
to whom this church belongs: therefore if we have husbands, but
one, Lord and prince but one, let us not read into many parties,
as if we had many husbands, lords, and princes, to govern us,
as his wife, his house, and kingdom. 'Is Christ divided?' (1 Cor
1:13).

5. The fifth argument is, There is 'one faith,' by which we all
stand justified by one Lord Jesus Christ; 'one faith' by which we
escape the wrath of God; 'one faith' by which only they that have
it are blessed; yea, seeing there is but 'one faith,' by which
we are all put into one way of salvation, let us hold together as
such.

6. The sixth argument is, There is 'one baptism.' Now we are come
to the pinch, viz., Whether it be that of water, or no? which
I must positively deny. (1.) Because water baptism hath nothing
to do in a church, as a church; it neither bringeth us into the
church, nor is any part of our worship when we come there; how then
can the peace and unity of the church depend upon water baptism?
Besides, he saith expressly, It is the 'unity of the spirit,' not
water, that is here intended: and the arguments brought to enforce
it, are such as wholly and immediately relate to the duty of the
church, as a church. (2.) Further, That other text, that treateth
of our being baptized into a body, saith expressly it is done by
the spirit: 'For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body'
(1 Cor 12:13). Here is the church presented as under the notion
of 'one body'; here is a baptism mentioned, by which they are
brought, or initiated into this body: Now that this is the baptism
of water, is utterly against the words of the text; 'For by one
spirit are we all baptized into one body.' Besides, if the baptism
here be of water, then is it the initiating ordinance; but the
contrary I have proved, and this author stands by my doctrine.
So then, the baptism here respecting the church as one body, and
water, having nothing to do to enter men into the church, nor to
command them to practise it as a church, in order to their peace
or communion, or respecting the worship of God as such: and (I say
again) the baptism in the sixth argument, being urged precisely
for no other purpose, but with respect to the church's peace as
a body; it must needs be THAT baptism, by virtue of which, they
were initiated, and joined together in one; and that baptism being
only that which the Spirit executeth; this therefore is that one
baptism.

7. The other argument is also effectual; there is 'One God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you
all' (Eph 4:6). If we are 'one body'; if to it there be but 'one
spirit'; if we have but 'one hope, one faith,' and be all baptized
by 'one spirit' into that 'one' body; and if we have but 'one
Lord, one God,' and he in every one of us; let us be also 'one':
and let them that are thus qualified, both join together, and hold
in one.

But our author against this, objecteth, That, 'now I employ my pen
against every man; and give the lie to all expositors, for they
hold this one baptism, to be none other than that of water.'[9]

Ans. What if I should also send you to answer those expositors
that expound certain scriptures for infant baptism, and that by
them brand us for anabaptists; must this drive you from your belief
of the truth? EXPOSITORS I reverence, but must live by mine own
faith (Habb 2:4). God hath no where bound himself to them more
than to others, with respect to the revelation of his mind in his
word. But it becomes not you to run thus to expositors, who are,
as to your notions in many things, but of yesterday: 'to the law,
and to the testimony' (Isa 8:20): for 'Out of the mouth of babes'
the Lord hath 'ordained strength' (Psa 8:2).

But you bid me tell you, 'What I mean by spirit baptism?'

Ans. Sir, you mistake me, I treat not here of our being baptized
with the Spirit, with respect to its coming from heaven into us;
but of that act of the spirit, when come, which baptizeth us into
a body or church. It is one thing to be baptized with the Spirit
in the first sense; and another to be baptized by it in the sense
I treat of: for the Spirit to come upon me, is one thing; and
for that when come, to implant, embody, or baptize me into the
body of Christ, is another. Your question therefore is grounded
on a mistake, both of my judgment, and the words of the apostle.
Wherefore thus I soon put an end to your objections. For the
Spirit to come down upon me, is one thing; and for the Spirit to
baptize, or implant me into the church, is another: for to be
possessed with the spirit, is one thing; and to be led by that
spirit, is another. I conclude then; seeing the argument taken
from that one baptism, respecteth church fellowship properly;
and seeing water baptism meddleth not with it as such; it is the
other, even that in 1 Corinthians 12:16 that is here intended,
and no other.

But you add, 'If nothing but extraordinary gifts are called the
baptism of the Spirit in a strict sense; then that baptism (1 Cor
12) must be water baptism, as well as that in the Ephesians.'

Hold: you make your conclusions before you have cause; first, prove
that in the Ephesians to be meant of water baptism, and that the
baptism in 1 Corinthians 12:16 is the baptism you would have it;
and then conclude my argument void. That it is the baptism of the
Holy Ghost according to the common notion, I say not; for you to
assert it is the baptism of water, gives the lie to the text: but
that it is an act of the Holy Ghost, baptizing the saints into
a body, or church, you will hardly be able to make the contrary
appear to be truth. 'But behold, while here you would have this
to be baptism with water, how you contradict and condemn your own
notion: you say water baptism is not the entering ordinance; yet
the baptism here is such as baptizeth us into a body: wherefore
before you say next time that this in 1 Corinthians 12:16 is meant
of water baptism; affirm that water baptism is the initiating or
entering ordinance, that your opinion and doctrine may hang better
together.'

We come to my third argument; which is to prove, that it is lawful
to hold church communion with the godly sincere believer, though
he hath not be baptized with water, because he hath the DOCTRINE
of baptisms (Heb 6:2). Which doctrine I distinguish from the
practice of it; the doctrine being that which by the outward sign
is presented to us; or which by the outward circumstance of the
act is preached to the believer, viz., the death of Christ, my
death with Christ; also his resurrection from the dead, and mine
with him to newness of life. 'This our author calleth one of the
strangest paradoxes that he hath LIGHTLY observed.'

Ans. How light he is in his observation of things, I know not; this
I am sure, the apostle makes mention of the doctrine of baptisms;
now that the doctrine of a man, or ordinance, is the signification
of what is preached, is apparent to very sense. What is Christ's
doctrine, Paul's doctrine, scripture doctrine, but the truth couched
under the words that are spoken? so the doctrine of baptism, yea
and the doctrine of the Lord's supper, are those truths or mysteries
that such ordinances preach unto us. And that the doctrine of
baptism, in this sense, is the great end for which that, and the
Lord's supper, was instituted, is apparent from all the scriptures:
it is that which the apostle seeketh for in that eminent sixth
of the Romans, 'Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized
into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore we are
buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we
also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted
together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection' (3-5). What is here discoursed, but
the doctrine of or that which baptism teacheth; with an intimation;
that that was the chief, for the sake of which that shadow was
instituted; as also that they that have the doctrine, or that
which is signified thereby, they only must reign with Christ.

Again, This is that which he seeketh for among the Corinthians;
'If the dead rise not at all,' [saith he], 'why then were you
baptized for the dead?' (1 Cor 15:29). Why then were you baptized?
What did baptism teach you? What doctrine did it preach to you?
further, 'Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen
with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised
him from the dead' (Col 2:12). What is here in chief asserted,
but the doctrine only which water baptism preacheth? with an
intimation, that they, and they only, are the saved of the Lord,
that have heard, received, and that live in this doctrine.

The same may be said of the Lord's supper, it also hath its
doctrine. But against this our author objecteth, saying, 'That
this is called the doctrine of baptism, I am yet to learn.'

Ans. Your ignorance of the truth makes it not an error: but I pray
you, what is the doctrine of baptism, if not that which baptism
teacheth, even that which is signified thereby? As that is the
doctrine of Christ, and the scriptures; which he and they teach
as the mind of God.

But you say, 'I took the doctrine of baptism to be the command
that a believer should be baptized, for such ends as the gospel
expresseth.'

Ans. To assert that a figurative ordinance is of God, is one thing;
but the doctrinal signification of that ordinance is another. A
man may preach the command, yet none of the doctrine which baptism
preacheth. The doctrine lieth not in the command, but the mystery
discovered to faith, by the act.

You object, 'If the resurrection be the doctrine of baptism, why
doth the apostle make that, and the doctrine of baptism, things
distinct, in Hebrews 6.'

Ans. The resurrection simply considered, is not the doctrine of
baptism, but Christ's, and mine by him. Besides, there is more in
it than the mystery of this resurrection; there is my death first,
and then my rising with him.

But you add, 'Under the law, all the sacrifices of that dispensation,
with their sabbaths, were types of that Christ, who was the substance
of all those ceremonies. If any of them then that professed faith
in the Messias to come, should upon scruples, or want of pretended
light, neglect the whole, or part of that typical worship; why
may not a man say of them, as this advocate of the practice under
debate, they had the richer and better sacrifice.'

Ans. First, that the brethren which refuse to be baptized, as
you and I would have them, refuse it for want of pretended light,
becomes you not to imagine, unless your boldness will lead you
to judge, that all men want sincerity, that come not up to our
judgment. Their conscience may be better than either yours or mine;
yet God, for purposes best known to himself, may forbear to give
them conviction of their duty in this particular. But what, because
they are not baptized, have they not Jesus Christ? Or, must we
now be afraid to say that Christ is better than water baptism?[10]
Yea, God himself for the sake of this better thing, hath suffered
in his church a suspension of some of his ordinances, yet owned
them for his truly constituted congregation. What say you to the
church in the wilderness? I touched you with it in my first, but
perceive you listed not to meddle therewith. That church received
members, the way which was not prescribed by, but directly against
the revealed mind of God; yet stood a true church, their members
true members; also that church in that state, was such before
whom, among whom, and to whom God continually made known himself
to be their God, and owned them for his peculiar treasure.

And now I am fallen upon it, let me a little enlarge: this church,
according to the then instituted worship of God, had circumcision
for their entering ordinance (Gen 17:13,14), without which it was
unlawful to receive any into fellowship with them: yea, he that
without it was received, was to be cut off, and cast out again.
Further, as to the passover, the uncircumcised were utterly
forbidden to eat it (Exo 12:48). Now if our brethren had as
express prohibition to justify their groundless opinion, as here
is to exclude the uncircumcised from the communion of the church
and the passover: I say, if they could find it written, 'No
unbaptized person shall enter, no unbaptized person shall eat of
the supper'; what a noise would they make about it? But yet let
the reader observe, that although circumcision was the entering
ordinance, and our author saith baptism is not; yea, though this
church was expressly forbidden to receive the uncircumcised, and
we have not a syllable now to forbid the unbaptized, yet this church
received members without, and otherwise than by this entering
ordinance. They also admitted them to the passover; yea,
entertained, retained, and held communion with them so long as
forty years without it. I say again, That the number of this sort
of communicants was not so few as six hundred thousand. Moreover,
to these uncircumcised was the land of Canaan given, yea, a
possession of part thereof before they were circumcised; but the
old circumcised ones might not enter therein. I am the larger in
this, because our author hath overlooked my first mention thereof.
And now I ask, What was the reason that God continued his presence
with this church notwithstanding this transgression? Was it not
because they had that richer and better thing, 'the Lord Jesus
Christ?' For they did all eat of that spiritual bread, and drink
of that 'spiritual rock that followed them: and that rock was
Christ' (1 Cor 10:3,4). I confess I find them under rebukes and
judgments in the wilderness, and that they were many times threatened
to be destroyed; but yet I find not so much as one check for their
receiving of members uncircumcised. Further, in the New Testament,
where we have a catalogue of their sins, and also of their punishment
for them; we find not a word about circumcision, nor the smallest
intimation of the least rebuke for neglecting the entering ordinance
(1 Cor 10:5-10). I will therefore say of them, as I have also
said of my brethren, 'They had the richer and better thing.'

But you object, 'That this putteth the whole of God's instituted
worship both under the law and gospel, to the highest uncertainties.'

Ans. This putteth our opposers out of their road, and quencheth the
flame of their unwarrantable zeal. For if the entering ordinance,
if the ordinance without which no man might be added to the church,
was laid aside for forty years; yea, if more than six hundred
thousand did communicate with them without it: I say again, If
they did it, and held communion with God, that notwithstanding;
yea, and had not, that we read of, all that time one small check
for so doing; why may not we now enter communion, hold communion,
maintain communion, church communion, without being judged,
and condemned by you? because we cannot for want of light be all
baptized before; especially considering baptism makes no man a
saint, is not the entering ordinance, is no part of the worship
of God enjoined the church as a church. To conclude, although we
receive members unbaptized [in after], we leave not God's instituted
worship at uncertainties, especially what he hath commanded us
as his church; we only profess our want of light in some things;
but see no word to warrant the forbearance of our duty in all,
for want of persuasion in one.

You object, 'I call baptism a circumstance, an outward-shew I
NICKNAME it.'

Ans. Deep reproof! but why did you not shew me my evil in thus
calling it, when opposed to the substance, and the thing signified?
Is it the substance, is it the thing signified? And why may not I
give it the name of a shew; when you call it a symbol, and compare
it to a gentleman's livery?

But you say, I call it an outward shew.

Ans. Is it an inward one? What is it?

'It is a command.'

Ans. But doth that install it in that place and dignity, that was
never intended for it?

You object further, 'They cannot have the doctrine of baptism that
understand not our way of administering it.'

This is your mistake, both of the doctrine and thing itself. But
if you will not SCORN to take notice of me, I advise you again
to consider, That a man may find baptism to be commanded, may
be informed who ought to administer it; may also know the proper
subject; and that the manner of baptizing is dipping; and may desire
to practise it because it is commanded, and yet know nothing of
what water baptism preacheth; or of the mystery baptism sheweth
to faith. But that the doctrine of baptism is not the practice of
it, not the outward act, but the thing signified; and that every
believer hath that, must argue you more than too bold to deny it.

But say you, 'Who taught you to divide betwixt Christ and his
precepts, that you word it at such a rate? That he that hath the
one,' &c.

Ans. To say nothing of faith, and the word; verily reason itself
teacheth it. For if Christ be my righteousness, and not water; if
Christ be my advocate, and not water; if there be that good and
blessedness in Christ, that is not in water; then is Jesus Christ
better than water; and also in these to be eternally divided from
water; unless we will make them co-saviours, co-advocates, and
such as are equally good and profitable to men.

But say you, 'I thought that he that hath Christ, had an orderly
right to all Christ's promises and precepts; and that the precepts
of Christ, are part of the riches that a believer hath in and by
Christ.'

Ans. A believer hath more in Christ than either promise or precept;
but all believers know not all things, that of God are given to
them by Christ. But must not they use, and enjoy what they know,
because they know not all. Or must they neglect the weightier
matters, because they want mint, and anise, and cummin? Your
pretended orderly right is your fancy; there is not a syllable
in the whole bible, that bids a Christian to forbear his duty in
other things, because he wanteth, as you term it, the symbol, or
water baptism.

But say you, 'He that despiseth his birthright of ordinances, our
church privileges, will be found to be a profane person, as Esau
in God's account.'

Baptism is not the privilege of a church as such. But what? are
they all Esau's indeed? Must we go to hell, and be damned, for
want of faith in water baptism? And take notice, I do not plead
for a despising of baptism, but a bearing with our brother, that
cannot do it for want of light. The best of baptism he hath,
viz. the signification thereof: he wanteth only the outward shew,
which if he had, would not prove him a truly visible saint; it
would not tell me he had the grace of God in his heart; it is no
characteristical note to another of my Sonship with God. But why
did you not answer these parts of my argument? Why did you only
cavil at words? which if they had been left out, the argument yet
stands good. 'He that is not baptized [in water], if yet a true
believer, hath the DOCTRINE of baptism; yea, he ought to have it
before he be convicted, it is his duty to be baptized, or else he
playeth the hypocrite. There is therefore no difference between
that believer that is, and he that is not yet baptized with water;
but only his going down into the water, there to perform an outward
ceremony, the substance of which he hath already; which yet he is
not commanded to do with respect to membership with the church;
but to obtain by that, further understanding of his privilege by
Christ, which before he made profession of, and that as a visible
believer.'[11]

But to come to my fourth argument, which you so tenderly touch
as if it burnt your fingers: 'I am bold [say I] to have communion
with visible saints as before, because God hath communion with them,
whose example in the case we are strictly commanded to follow.'
'Receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory
of God' (Rom 15:7). Yea, though they be saints, in opinion contrary
to you, or I. 'We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak, and not to please ourselves' (Rom 15:1). Infirmities
that are sinful: for they that are natural are incident to all.
Infirmities therefore they are, that for want of light, cause
a man to err in circumstantials: and the reason upon which Paul
groundeth this admonition is; 'For even Christ pleased not himself,
but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee
fell on me' (Rom 15:3).

You say to this, 'That it is Paul's direction to the church at
Rome how to receive their brethren church members.'

I answer, 1. What? are not the poor saints now in this city? are
not they concerned in these instructions? or is not the church
by these words at all directed how to carry it to those that were
not yet in fellowship? A bold assertion! but grounded upon nothing,
but that you would have it so. 2. But how will you prove that there
was a church, a rightly constituted church, at Rome, besides that
in Aquila's house? (chap. 16). Neither doth this epistle, nor any
other in the whole book of God affirm it. Besides, since Paul in
this last chapter saluteth the church, as in this man's house,
but the other, only as particular saints, it giveth further ground
of conviction to you, that those others were not as yet imbodied
in such a fellowship. 3. But suppose there was another church
besides; it doth not therefore follow, that the apostle exhorteth
them only to receive persons already in fellowship; but 'Him,'
even every 'Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to
doubtful disputations' (14:1). 4. Suppose again, the receiving
here exhorted to, be such as you would have it, yet the rule by
which they are directed to do it, is that by which we perceive
that Christ hath received them. But Christ did not receive them by
[water] baptism, but as given to him by the Father. Him, therefore,
concerning whom we are convinced, that he by the Father is given
to Christ, 'Him should we receive.' 5. But what need I grant you,
that which cannot be proved? yet if you could prove it, it availeth
nothing at all; because you may not, cannot, ought not to dare to
limit the exhortation to receiving of one another into each other's
affections only; and not also receiving saints into communion.

But you object: 'To make God's receiving the rule of our receiving,
in all cases will not hold.'

Ans. Keep to the thing, man: if it hold in the case in hand, it
is enough, the which you have not denied. And that it holds thus,
is plain, because commanded. But let the reader know, that your
putting in that way of his receiving which is invisible to us;
is but an unhandsome straddling over my argument, which treateth
only of a visible receiving; such as is manifest to the church.
This you knew, but sought by evading to turn the reader from
considering the strength of this my argument. 'The receiving then
[said I] because it is set as an example to the church, is such
as must needs be visible unto them; and is best discovered by that
word that describeth the visible saint. Whoso then you can judge
a visible saint, one that walketh with God, you may, nay ought to
judge by the same word, that God hath received him. Now him that
God receiveth, him should you receive.' But will any object; they
cannot believe that God receiveth the unbaptized saints; I will
not suppose you so much stupefied, and therefore shall make no
answer.

But you seem to be much offended, because I said, 'Vain man! Think
not by the straightness of thine order in outward, and bodily
conformity to outward and shadowish circumstances, that thy peace
is maintained with God?' But why so much offended at this? [It is
say you] 'Because you intend by this the brethren of the baptized
way.'

Ans. If they be vain men, and set up their OWN order, how straight
soever they make it, they are worthy to be reproved; if 'they
have rejected the word of the Lord; what wisdom is in them?' (Jer
8:9). And as you suggest the first, I affirm the second. But if
you would be justified in excluding those, with whom yet you see
God hath communion, because they yet see not a shadow with you;
produce the scripture for such order, that we may believe it is the
order of God. But deal fairly, lest we shew your nakedness, and
others see your shame. You tell me of the order of the Colossians
(2:5). But if you can prove that that church refused to hold
communion with that saint whom they knew to be received by Christ,
and held communion with him [Christ], or that none but those that
are baptized [in water] are received by and hold communion with
him, then you justify your order. In the mean while the whole of
mine argument stands firm against you; 'You must have communion
with visible saints, because God hath communion with them, whose
example in the case we are strictly commanded to follow.'

But you ask me, 'If outward and bodily conformity be become a
crime?'

Ans. I nowhere said it; but know that to glorify God with our
bodies, respecteth chiefly far higher and more weighty things,
than that of water baptism; 'Whatsoever is not of faith is sin'
(Rom 14:23); and to set up an ordinance, though an ordinance of
God, that by it the church may be pulled in pieces, or the truly
visible saints excluded communion with their brethren; I say again,
to make water baptism a bar and division between saint and saint,
every whit otherwise gracious and holy alike: This is like fasting
'for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness'
(Isa 58:4); and is not to be found within the whole bible, but
is wholly an order of your own devising. As to the peace you make
an objection about you have granted me what I intended; and now I
add further, that for church peace to be founded in water baptism,
or any other external rite, not having to do with the church, as
a church, is poor peace indeed: Church peace is founded in blood;
and love to each other for Jesus' sake (Phil 2:1-4). Bearing with,
and forbearing one another, in all things circumstantial, that
concern not church worship as such (Eph 4:31,32). And in my other
[treatise] I have proved that baptism is not such, and therefore
ought not to be urged to make rents and divisions among brethren.

But you ask, 'Is my peace maintained in a way of disobedience?
and conclude if it be, you fear it is false.'

Ans. If the first were true; you need not to doubt of the second;
but it may be thought he hath little to say in the controversy,
who is forced to stuff out his papers, with such needless prattles
as these.

My fifth argument is, 'That a failure in such a circumstance as
water baptism, doth not unchristian us'; this you are compelled
to grant. And I conclude with your words, persons ought to be
Christians before visible Christians; such as any congregation in
the land may receive to communion with themselves, because God
hath shewed us that he has received them. 'Receive him to the glory
of God.' To the glory of God, is put in on purpose, to shew what
dishonour they bring to him, who despise to have communion with
such, whom they know do maintain communion with God. I say again,
How doth this man, or that church, glorify God, or count the wisdom
and holiness of heaven beyond them, when they refuse communion
with them, concerning whom yet they are convinced, that they
have communion with God? But my argument you have not denied; nor
meddled with the conclusion at all; which is, 'That therefore,
even because a failure here, doth not unchristian us, doth not
make us insincere'; and I add, doth not lay us open to any revealed
judgment or displeasure of God (if it doth, shew where) therefore
it should not, it ought not to make us obnoxious to the displeasure
of the church of God.

But you say, 'I rank gospel precepts, with Old Testament abrogated
ceremonies.'

Ans. You should have given your reader my words, that he might
have judged from my own mouth: I said then, speaking before of
Christianity itself, 'that thousands of thousands that could not
consent to water, as we, are now with the innumerable company of
angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect.' What was said of
eating, or the contrary, may as to this be said of water baptism:
neither if I be baptized, am I the better? neither if I be not,
am I the worse? not the better before God, not the worse before
men: still meaning as Paul, provided I walk according to my light
with God; otherwise it is false. For if a man that seeth it to
be his duty, shall despisingly neglect it; or if he that hath not
faith about it, shall foolishly take it up: both these are for
this the worse; I mean, as to their own sense, being convicted in
themselves, as transgressors. He therefore that doth it according
to his light, doth well; and he that doth it not, for want of light,
doth not ill; for he approveth his heart to be sincere with God,
even by that his forbearance. And I tell you again, It is nowhere
recorded, that this man is under any revealed threatening of God,
for his not being baptized with water, he not having light therein,
but is admitted through his grace to as many promises as you. If
therefore he be not a partaker of that circumstance, yet he is of
that liberty, and mercy, by which you stand with God.

But that I practise instituted worship, upon the same account as
Paul did circumcision, and shaving, is too bold for you to presume
to imagine. What? because I will not suffer water to carry away
the epistles from the Christians; and because I will not let
water baptism be the rule, the door, the bolt, the bar, the wall
of division between the righteous, and the righteous; must I
therefore be judged to be a man without conscience to the worship
of Jesus Christ? The Lord deliver me from superstitious and
idolatrous thoughts about any of the ordinances of Christ and of
God. But my fifth argument standeth against you untouched; you
have not denied, much less confuted the least syllable thereof.

You tell me my sixth argument is, Edification.

Ans. If it be, why is it not embraced? But my own words are these:
'I am for holding communion thus. Because the edification of souls
in the faith and holiness of the gospel, is of greater concern than
an agreement in outward things; I say, it is of greater concern
with us, and of far more profit to our brother, than our agreeing
in, or contesting for, water baptism' (John 16:13; 1 Cor 14:12;
2 Cor 10:8, 12:19; Eph 4:12; 1 Cor 13:1,2; 8:1). Now why did you
not take this argument in pieces, and answer those scriptures, on
which the strength thereof depends; but if to contest, and fall
out about water baptism, be better than to edify the house of God,
produce the texts, that we may be informed.

You say, 'Edification is the end of all communion, but all things
must be done in order, orderly.'

Ans. When you have proved that there is no such thing as an orderly
edifying of the church, without water baptism precede, then it
will be time enough to think you have said something.

You add, 'Edification as to church fellowship being a building up,
doth suppose the being of a church; but pray you shew us a church
without baptism.'

Ans. See here the spirit of these men, who for the want of water
baptism, have at once unchurched all such congregations of God
in the world; but against this I have, and do urge, That water
baptism giveth neither being, nor well-being to a church, neither
is any part of that instituted worship of God, that the church, as
such, should be found in the practice of. Therefore her edification
as a church may, yea and ought to be attained unto without it.

But you say, 'Shew us a New Testament church without baptism.'

Ans. What say you to the church all along the Revelation quite
through the reign of Antichrist? Was that a New Testament church,
or no? Again, If baptism be without the church, as a church,
if it hath nothing to do in the constituting of a church; if it
be not the door of entrance into the church, if it be no part of
church-worship as such; then, although all the members of that
church were baptized, yet the church is a church without water
baptism. But all the churches in the New Testament were such:
therefore, &c. Again, If baptism respect believers, as particular
persons only; if it respects their own conscience only; if it
make a man no visible believer to me, then it hath nothing to do
with church-membership. Because, that which respects my own person
only, my own conscience only: that which is no character of my
visible saintship to the church, cannot be an argument unto them
to receive me into fellowship with themselves. But this is true.
Therefore, &c.

You proceed, 'If by edification, be meant the private increase
of grace, in one another, in the use of private means, as private
Christians in meeting together; how doth the principle you oppose
hinder that? Endeavour to make men as holy as you can, that they
may be fitted for church-fellowship, when God shall shew them the
orderly way to it.'

Ans. What a many private things have we now brought out to public
view? Private Christians, private means, and a private increase
of grace. But, Sir, Are none but those of your way the public
Christians? Or, ought none but them that are baptized to have the
public means of grace? Or, must their graces be increased by none
but private means? Was you awake now? Or, are you become so high
in your own phantasies, that none have, or are to have but private
means of grace? And, are there no public Christians, or public
christian meetings, but them of your way? I did not think that
all but baptists, should only abide in holes.

But you find fault because I said, 'Edification is greater than
contesting about water baptism.'

Ans. If it be not, confute me; if it be, forbear to cavil: water
baptism, and all God's ordinances, are to be used to edification;
not to beget heats and contentions among the godly, wherefore
edification is best.

Object. 'I had thought that the preaching, and opening baptism,
might have been reckoned a part of our edification.'

Ans. The act of water baptism hath not place in church worship,
neither in whole nor in part; wherefore pressing it upon the church
is to no purpose at all.

Object. 'Why may you not as well say, that edification is greater
than breaking of bread.'

Ans. So it is, else that should never have been instituted to
edify withal; that which serveth, is not greater than he that is
served thereby. Baptism and the Lord's supper both, were made for
us, not we for them; wherefore both were made for our edification,
but no one for our destruction. But again, The Lord's supper,
not baptism, is for the church, as a church; therefore as we will
maintain the church's edifying, that must be maintained in it; yea,
sued oft, to shew the Lord's death till he come (1 Cor 11:22-26).
Besides, because it is a great part of church worship, as such,
therefore it is pronounced blessed, the Lord did openly bless it
before he gave it; yea and we ought to bless it also; 'The cup of
blessing which we bless,' not to say more. Therefore your reasoning
from the one to the other will not hold.

Object. 'How comes contesting for water baptism to be so much
against you?'

Ans. First, Because weak brethren cannot bear it; whom yet we are
commanded to receive, but not to doubtful disputation; doubtful
to them, therefore for their sakes, I must forbear it (Rom 14:1).
Secondly, Because I have not seen any good effect, but the contrary,
wherever such hot spirits have gone before me: 'For where envying
and strife is, there is confusion,' or tumults, 'and every evil
work' (James 3:16).[12] Thirdly, Because by the example of the
Lord, and Paul, we must consider the present state of the church,
and not trouble them with what they cannot bear (John 16:13; 1
Cor 3:1-3). I conclude then, edification in the church is to be
preferred above what the church, as a church, hath nothing to do
withal. 'All things, dearly beloved, are for our edifying' (1 Cor
14:5, 12:26; 2 Cor 12:19; Eph 4:16; Rom 15:2; 1 Cor 14:3; 2 Cor
10:8, 13:10; Rom 14:19). Before I wind up this argument, I present
you with several instances, shewing that the breach of [some of]
God's precepts have been borne with, when they come in competition
with edification. As first, That of Aaron, who let the offering for
sin be burnt, that should have indeed been eaten (Lev 10:16-20).
Yet because he could not do it to his edification, Moses was
content. But the law was thereby transgressed, 'The priest that
offereth it for sin, shall eat it' (6:26).

To this you reply, 'That was not a constant, continued forbearing
of God's worship, but a suspending of it for a season.'

Ans. We also suspend it but for a season; when persons can be
baptized to their edification, they have the liberty. But, This
was not a bare suspension, but a flat transgression of the law. 'Ye
should indeed have eaten it.' Yet Moses was content (Lev 10:16-20).

But say you, 'Perhaps it was suspended upon just and legal grounds,
though not expressed.'

Ans. The express rule was against it; 'Ye should indeed [said
Moses] have eaten it in the holy place: as I commanded' (v 18). But
good Sir, are you now for unwritten verities? for legal grounds,
though not expressed? I will not drive you further, here is Rome
enough. As for Eldad and Medad, it cannot be denied, but that their
edifying of the people, was preferred before their conforming to
every circumstance (Num 11:16-26).

You add, 'That Paul for a seeming low thing did withstand Peter.'

Sir, If you make but a seeming low thing of dissembling, and teaching
others so to do, especially where the doctrine of justification
is endangered, I cannot expect much good conscience from you (Gal
2:11-13).

As for your answer to the case of Hezekiah, it is faulty in two
respects: 1. For that you make the passover a type of the Lord's
supper, when it was only a type of the body and blood of the Lord:
'For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us' (1 Cor 5:7).
2. In that you make it an example to you to admit persons unprepared
to the Lord's supper.

Ans. May you indeed receive persons into the church unprepared
for the Lord's supper; yea, unprepared for that, with other solemn
appointments? For so you word it. O what an engine have you made
of water baptism. Thus, gentle reader, while this author teareth
us in pieces for not making [water] baptism the orderly rule
for receiving the godly and conscientious into communion; he can
receive persons if baptized, though unprepared for the supper, and
other solemn appointments? I would have thee consult the place,
and see if it countenanceth such an act. That a man who pleadeth
for a water baptism above the peace and edification of the church,
ought to be received, although unprepared, into the church to the
Lord's supper, and other solemn appointments; especially considering
the nature of right church constitution, and the severity
of God towards those that came unprepared to his table of old (1
Cor 11:28-30). A riddle indeed, That the Lord should, without a
word, so severely command, that all which want light in baptism,
be excluded church privileges; and yet against his word, admit
of persons unprepared, to the Lord's table, and other solemn
appointments.

But good Sir, why so short-winded? why could not you make the same
work with the other scriptures, as you did with these? I must leave
them upon you unanswered; and standing by my argument conclude,
That if laws and ordinances of old have been broken, and the breach
of them born with, when yet the observation of outward things was
more strictly commanded than now, if the profit and edification
of the church come in competition; how much more, may not we have
communion, church communion, when no law of God is transgressed
thereby. And note, That all this while I plead not, as you, for
persons unprepared, but godly, and such as walk with God.

We come now to my seventh argument, for communion with the godly,
though unbaptized persons; which you say is LOVE. My argument
is this; 'Therefore I am for communion thus; because love, which
above all things we are commanded to put on, is of much more worth
than to break about baptism.' And let the reader note, That of
this argument you deny not so much as one syllable, but run to
another story; but I will follow you. I add further, That love is
more discovered when we receive for the sake of Christ, than when
we refuse his children for want of water: And tell you again, That
this exhortation to love is grounded not upon [water] baptism,
but the putting on of the new creature, which hath swallowed up
all distinctions (Col 3:9-14). Yea, there are ten arguments in
this one, which you have not so much as touched; but thus object,

'That man that makes affection the rule of his walking, rather
than judgment, it is no wonder if he go out of the way.'

Ans. Love to them, we are persuaded that God hath received, is
love that is guided by judgment; and to receive them that are
such, because God hath bidden us (Rom 14), is judgment guided by
rule. My argument therefore hath forestalled all your noise, and
standeth still on its legs against you. As to the duties of piety
and charity, you boast of, sound not a trumpet, tell not your
left hand of it; we are talking now of communion of saints, church
communion, and I plead, that to love, and hold together as such,
is better than to break in pieces for want of water baptism. My
reason is, because we are exhorted in all things to put on love;
the love of church communion: contrariwise you oppose, Above all
things put on water. For the best saint under heaven that hath
not that, with him you refuse communion. Thus you make baptism,
though no church ordinance, a bar to shut out the godly, and a
trap-door to let the unprepared into churches, to the Lord's
supper, and other solemn appointments.

But you object, 'Must our love to the unbaptized indulge them
in an act of disobedience? Cannot we love their persons, parts,
graces, but we must love their sins?'

Ans. We plead not for indulging, 'But are there not with you,
even with you, sins against the Lord your God?' (2 Chron 28:10).
But why can you indulge the baptists in many acts of disobedience?
For to come unprepared into the church, is an act of disobedience:
To come unprepared to the supper is an act of disobedience; and to
come so also to other solemn appointments, are acts of disobedience.

'But for these things,' you say, 'you do not cast, nor keep any
out of the church.'

Ans. But what acts of disobedience do we indulge them in?

'In the sin of infant baptism.'

Ans. We indulge them not; but being commanded to bear with the
infirmities of each other, suffer it; it being indeed in our eyes
such; but in theirs they say a duty, till God shall otherwise
persuade them. If you be without infirmity, do you first throw a
stone at them: They keep their faith in that to themselves, and
trouble not their brethren therewith: we believe that God hath
received them; they do not want to us a proof of their sonship
with God; neither hath he made water a wall of division between
us, and therefore we do receive them.

Object. 'I take it to be the highest act of friendship to be
faithful to these professors, and to tell them they want this one
thing in gospel order, which ought not to be left undone.'

Ans. If it be the highest piece of friendship, to preach water
baptism to unbaptized believers, the lowest act thereof must needs
be very low. But contrariwise, I count it so far off from being
any act of friendship, to press baptism in our notion on those
that cannot bear it; that it is a great abuse of the peace of
my brother, the law of love, the law of Christ, or the society
of the faithful. Love suffereth long, and is kind, is not easily
provoked: let us therefore follow after the things that make for
peace, and things wherewith one may edify another: let every one
of us please his neighbour, for his good to edification: Bear you
one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ (1 Cor 13;
Rom 14:19, 15:2; Gal 6:2).

But say you, 'I doubt when this comes to be weighed in God's
balance, it will be found no less than flattery, for which you
will be reproved.'

Ans. It seems you do but doubt it, wherefore the principles from
which you doubt it, of that methinks you should not be certain;
but this is of little weight to me; for he that will presume
to appropriate the epistles to himself and fellows, for the sake
of baptism, and that will condemn all the churches of Christ in
the land for want of baptism, and that will account his brother
as profane Esau and rejected, as idolatrous Ephraim because he
wanteth his way of water baptism; he acts out of his wonted way,
of rigidness, when he doth but doubt, and not affirm his brother
to be a flatterer. I leave therefore this your doubt to be resolved
at the day of judgment, and in the mean time trample upon your harsh
and unchristian surmises. As to our love to Christians in other
cases, I hope we shall also endeavour to follow the law of the
Lord; but because it respects not the matter in hand, it concerns
us not now to treat thereof.

My argument treateth of church communion; in the prosecution of
which I prove. 1. That love is grounded upon the new creature (Col
3:10-15). 2. Upon our fellowship with the Father and Son (1 John
1:2,3). 3. That with respect to this, it is the fulfilling of the
royal law (James 4:11; Rom 14:21). 4. That it shews itself in acts
of forbearing, rather than in publishing some truths: communicating
only what is profitable, forbearing to publish what cannot be born
(1 Cor 3:1,2; Acts 20:18-20; John 3:16,17). 5. I shew further, That
to have fellowship for, to make that the ground of, or to receive
one another chiefly upon the account of an outward circumstance;
to make baptism the including and excluding charter: the bounds,
bar, and rule of communion, when by the word of the everlasting
testament, there is no word for it, to speak charitably, if it
be not for want of love, it is for want of light in the mysteries
of the kingdom of Christ. Strange! Take two Christians equal in
all points but this; nay, let one go beyond the other in grace and
goodness, as far as a man is beyond a babe, yet water shall turn
the scale, shall open the door of communion to the less; and
command the other to stand back: yet is no proof to the church of
this babe's faith and hope, hath nothing to do with his entering
into fellowship, is no part of the worship of the church.[13]
These things should have been answered, seeing you will take upon
you so roundly to condemn our practice.

You come now to my eighth argument; which you do not only render
falsely, but by so doing abuse your reader. I said not that the
church at Corinth did shut each other out of communion; but, for
God's people to divide into parties, or to shut each other from
church communion, though for greater points, and upon higher
pretences, than that of water baptism, hath heretofore been counted
carnal, and the actors therein babyish Christians: and then bring
in the factions, that was in the church at Corinth. But what! May
not the evil of denying church communion now, if proved naught
by a less crime in the church at Corinth, be counted carnal and
babyish; but the breach of communion must be charged upon them at
Corinth also?

That my argument is good you grant, saying, 'The divisions of the
church at Corinth were about the highest fundamental principles,
for which they are often called carnal'; yet you cavil at it. But
if they were to be blamed for dividing, though for the highest
points; are not you much more for condemning your brethren to
perpetual banishment from church communion, though sound in all
the great points of the gospel, and right in all church ordinances
also, because for want of light they fail only in the point of
baptism?

As to your quibble about Paul and Apollos, whether they, or
others, were the persons, though I am satisfied you are out, yet
it weakeneth not my argument; for if they were blame worthy for
dividing, though about the highest fundamental principles, as you
say, how ought you to blush for carrying it as you do to persons,
perhaps, more godly than ourselves, because they jump not with
you in a circumstance? That the divisions at Corinth were helped
on by the abuse of baptism, to me is evident, from Paul's so oft
suggesting it: 'Were ye baptized in the name of Paul? I thank God
that I baptized none of you,--lest any should say, I had baptized
in mine own name' (1:13-15).

I do not say, that they who baptized them designed this, or that
baptism in itself effected it; nor yet, though our author feigns
it, 'that they were most of them baptized by their factious
leaders.' But that they had their factious leaders, is evident;
and that these leaders made use of the names of Paul, Apollos,
and Christ, is as evident; for by these names they were beguiled
by the help of ABUSED baptism.

But say you, 'Wherein lies the force of this man's argument against
baptism as to its place, worth, and continuance?'

I answer: I have no argument against its place, worth or continuance,
although thus you seek to scandalize me. But this kind of sincerity
of yours, will never make me one of your disciples. Have not I told
you even in this argument, 'That I speak not as I do, to persuade
or teach men to break the least of God's commandments; but that
my brethren of the baptized way may not hold too much thereupon,
may not make it an essential of the gospel, nor yet of the communion
of saints.' Yet he feigns that I urge two arguments against it.
But reader, thou mayest know I have no such reason in my book.
Besides, I should be a fool indeed, were I against it, should I
make use of such weak arguments. My words then are these: 'I thank
God,' said Paul, 'that I baptized none of you but Crispus,' &c.
'Not but that then it was an ordinance, but they abused it in making
parties thereby, as they abused also Paul, and Cephas. Besides,
said he, I know not whether I baptized any other. By this negligent
relating who were baptized by him, he sheweth that he made no
such matter thereof, as some in these days do. Nay, that he made
no matter at all thereof with respect to a church communion. For
if he did not heed who himself had baptized, much less did he heed
who were baptized by others? But if baptism had been the initiating
ordinance, and I now add, essential to church communion; then no
doubt he had made more conscience of it, than thus lightly to pass
it by.'

I add further, where he saith, He 'was not sent to baptize'; that
he spake with an holy indignation against those that had abused
that ordinance. 'Baptism is an holy ordinance, but when Satan
abuseth it, and wrencheth it out of its place, making that which
is ordained of God, for the edification of believers, the only
weapon to break in pieces the love, unity, and concord of the
saints; than as Paul said of himself and fellows (1 Cor 3:5-7).
What is baptism? Neither is baptism any thing? This is no new
doctrine, for God by the mouth of the prophet of old, cried out
against his own appointments, when abused by his own people (Isa
1:11-15); because they used them "for strife, and debate, and to
smite with the fist of wickedness"' (58:4). But to forbear, to
take notice thus of these things, my argument stands firm against
you: 'For if they at Corinth were blame worthy for dividing,
though their divisions were, if you say true, about the highest
fundamentals, you ought to be ashamed, thus to banish your brethren
from the privileges of church communion for ever, for the want of
so low a thing as water baptism.' I call it not low, with respect
to God's appointment, though so, it is far from the highest place,
but in comparison of those fundamentals, about which you say, 'the
Corinthians made their divisions.'

You come next to my ninth argument, and serve it as Hanun served
David's servants (2 Sam 10:4), you have cut off one half of its
beard, and its garments to its buttocks, thinking to send it home
with shame. You state it thus: 'That by denying communion with
unbaptized believers, you take from them their privileges to which
they are born.'

Ans. Have I such an argument, in all my little book? Are not my
words verbatim these? 'If we shall reject visible saints by
calling, saints that have communion with God; that have received
the law at the hand of Christ; that are of an holy conversation
among men, they desiring to have communion with us; as much
as in us lieth, we take from them their very privileges, and the
blessings to which they were born of God.' This is mine argument:
now confute it.

Paul saith, not only to the gathered church at Corinth, but to
all scattered saints, that in every place call upon the name of
the Lord (1 Cor 1:2). That if Jesus Christ is theirs; that Paul
and Apollos, and Cephas, and the world, and all things else was
theirs (3:22).

But you answer, 'We take from them nothing, but we keep them from
a disorderly practice of gospel ordinances, we offer them their
privileges, in the way of gospel order.'

Ans. Where have you one word of God, that forbiddeth a person, so
qualified, as is signified in mine argument, the best communion
of saints for want of water? There is not a syllable for this in
all the book of God. So then, you in this your plausible defence,
do make your scriptureless light, which in very deed is darkness
(Isa 8:20), the rule of your brother's faith; and how well you
will come off for this in the day of God, you might, were you not
wedded to your wordless opinion, soon begin to conceive.

I know your reply, 'New Testament saints are all baptized first.'

Ans. Suppose it granted: Were they baptized, that thereby they
might be qualified for their right to communion of saints, so
that, without their submitting to water, they were to be denied
the other? Further, suppose I should grant this groundless notion,
Were not the Jews in Old Testament times to enter the church by
circumcision? (Gen 17; Exo 12). For that, though water is not,
was the very entering ordinance. Besides, as I said before, there
was a full forbidding of all that were not circumcised from entering
into fellowship, with a threatening to cut them off from the church
if they entered in without it: yet more than six hundred thousand
entered that church without it. But how now, if such an one as
you had then stood up and objected, Sir Moses, What is the reason
that you transgress the order of God, to receive members without
circumcision? Is not that the very entering ordinance? Are not you
commanded to keep out of the church all that are not circumcised?
Yea, and for all those that you thus received, are you not commanded
to cast them out again, to cut them off from among this people
(Gen 17:13,14; Exo 12:44-46). I say, Would not this man have had
a far better argument to have resisted Moses, than you, in your
wordless notion, have to shut out men from the church, more holy
than many of ourselves? But do you think that Moses and Joshua,
and all the elders of Israel, would have thanked this fellow, or
have concluded that he spake on God's behalf? Or, that they should
then, for the sake of a better than what you call order, have set
to the work that you would be doing, even to break the church in
pieces for this?

But say you, 'If any will find or force another way into the sheep
fold than by the footsteps of the flock, we have no such custom
nor the churches of God.'

Ans. What was done of old I have shewed you, that Christ, not
baptism, is the way to the sheep fold, is apparent: and that the
person [who thus enters], in mine argument, is entitled to all
these, to wit, Christ, grace, and all the things of the kingdom
of Christ in the church, is, upon the scriptures urged, as evident.

But you add, 'That according to mine old confidence, I affirm,
That drink ye all of this is entailed to faith, not baptism: a
thing,' say you, 'soon said, but yet never proved.'

Ans. 1. That it is entailed to faith, must be confessed of all
hands. 2. That it is the privilege of him that discerneth the Lord's
body, and that no man is to deny him it, is also by the text as
evident, 'and so let him eat,' because he is worthy. Wherefore
he, and he only, that discerneth the Lord's body, he is the worthy
receiver, the worthy receiver in God's estimation; but that none
discern the Lord's body but the baptized [in water], is both fond
and ridiculous once to surmise.

Wherefore to exclude Christians, and to debar them their heaven-born
privileges, for want of that which yet God never made the wall of
division betwixt us: This looks too like a spirit of persecution
(Job 19:28), and carrieth in it those eighteen absurdities which
you have so hotly cried out against. And I do still add, 'Is
it not that which greatly prevailed with God to bring down those
judgments which at present we [the people of God] groan under,
I will dare to say it was,[14] A cause thereof.' Yea, I will yet
proceed; I fear, I strongly fear, that the rod of God is not yet
to be taken from us; for what [is a] more provoking sin among
Christians than to deny one another their rights and privileges,
to which they are born of God? And then to father these their
doings upon God, when yet he hath not commanded it, neither in
the New Testament nor the Old.

But I may not lightly pass this by, for because I have gathered
eighteen absurdities from this abuse of God's ordinances, or from
the sin of binding the brethren to observe order, not founded on
the command of God; and I am sure you have none to shut out men as
good, as holy, and as sound in faith as ourselves, from communion.
Therefore you call my conclusion devilish, top-full of ignorance
and prejudice, and me, one of Machiavel's scholars, also proud,
presumptuous, impeaching the judgment of God.

Ans. But what is there in my proposition, that men, considerate,
can be offended at? These are my words: 'But to exclude Christians
from church communion, and to debar them their heaven-born
privileges, for the want of that which yet God never made a wall
of division between us: this looks too like a spirit of persecution:
this respecteth more the form than the spirit and power of godliness,
&c. Shall I add, Is it not that which greatly prevailed to bring
down those judgments which at present we feel and groan under?
I will dare to say, it was a cause thereof.' A was in my copy,
instead whereof the printer put in the; for this, although I
speak only the truth, I will not beg of you belief; besides, the
bookseller desired me, because of the printer's haste, to leave
the last sheet to be overlooked by him, which was the cause it
was not among the erratas. But I say, wherein is the proposition
offensive? Is it not a wicked thing to make bars to communion,
where God hath made none? Is it not a wickedness to make that a
wall of division betwixt us which God never commanded to be so? If
it be not, justify your practice; if it be, take shame. Besides,
the proposition is universal, why then should you be the chief
intended? But you have in this done like to the lawyers of old,
who, when Christ reproved the pharisees of wickedness before them,
said, 'Master, thus saying thou reproachest us also' (Luke 11:45).

But you feign, and would also that the world should believe, that
the eighteen absurdities which naturally flow from the proposition
I make, to be the effects of baptism, saying to me, 'None but
yourself could find an innocent truth big with so many monstrous
absurdities.'

I answer: This is but speaking wickedly for God, or rather to
justify your wordless practice. I say not that baptism hath any
absurdity in it, though your abusing it, hath them all, and many
more, while you make it, without warrant from the word, as the
flaming sword, to keep the brotherhood out of communion, because
they, after your manner, cannot consent thereto. And let no man
be offended, for that I suggest that baptism may be abused to the
breeding such monstrous absurdities, for greater truths than that
have been as much abused. What say you to, 'This is my body?' To
instance no more, although I could instance many, are not they the
words of our Lord? Are not they part of the scriptures of truth?
and yet behold, even with those words, the devil, by abusing
them, made an engine to let out the heart-blood of thousands.[15]
Baptism also may be abused, and is, when more is laid upon it
by us than is commanded by God. And that you do so, is manifest
by what I have said already, and shall yet say to your fourteen
arguments.

My last argument, you say, is this: 'The world may wonder at your
carriage to these unbaptized persons, in keeping them out of
communion?'

Ans. You will set up your own words, and then fight against them;
but my words are these: 'What greater contempt can be thrown upon
the saints, than for their brethren to cut them off from, or to
debar them church communion.' And now I add, Is not this to deliver
them to the devil (1 Cor 5), or to put them to shame before all
that see your acts? There is but one thing can hinder this, and
that is, by-standers see that these, your brethren, that you thus
abuse, are as holy men as ourselves. Do you more to the openly
prophane, yea, to all wizards and witches in the land?[16] For
all you can do to them, I speak now as to church acts, is no other
than to debar them the communion of saints.

And now I say again, the world may well wonder, when they see
you deny holy men of God that liberty of the communion of saints
which you monopolise to yourselves: and though they do not understand
the grounds of profession, or communion, yet they can both see
and say, these holy men of God, in all visible acts of holiness,
are not one inch behind you. Yea, I will put it to yourselves, If
those many, yea, very many, who thus severely, but with how little
ground, is seen by men of God, you deny communion with; are not
of as good, as holy, as unblameable in life, and as sound, if not
sounder in the faith than many among ourselves: Here only they
make the stop, they cannot, without light, be driven into water
baptism, I mean after our notion of it: but what if they were, it
would be little sign to me, that they were sincere with God.

To conclude this; when you have proved that water baptism, which
you yourself have said is not a church ordinance, is essential
to church communion, and that the church may, by the word of God,
bolt, bar, and for ever shut out those, far better than ourselves,
that have not, according to our notion, been baptized with water;
then it will be time enough to talk of ground for so doing. In
the mean time I must take leave to tell you, 'There is not in all
the Bible one syllable for such a practice, wherefore your great
cry about your order is wordless, and therefore faithless, and
is a mere human invention.'


I COME NOW TO YOUR FOURTEEN ARGUMENTS, AND SHALL IMPARTIALLY
CONSIDER THEM.

Your first argument to prove it lawful to reject the unbaptized
saint, is, 'Because the great commission of Christ (Matt 28),
from which all persons have their authority for their ministry,
if any authority at all, doth clearly direct the contrary. By that
commission ministers are first to disciple, and then to baptize
them so made disciples, and afterwards to teach them to observe
all that Christ commanded them, as to other ordinances of worship.
If ministers have no other authority to teach them other parts of
gospel worship, before they believe and are baptized, it may be
strongly supposed they are not to admit them to other ordinances
before they have passed this first enjoined in the commission.'

Ans. 1. That the ministers are to disciple and baptize, is granted.
But that they are prohibited, by the commission (Matt 28), to
teach the disciples other parts of gospel worship that have not
light in baptism, remains for you to prove. Shall I add, this
position is so absurd and void of truth, that none that have
ever read the love of Christ, the nature of faith, the end of the
gospel, or of the reason of instituted worship (which is edification)
with understanding, should so much as once imagine.

But where are they here forbidden to teach them other truths before
they be baptized? This text as fairly denieth to the unbaptized
believer heaven and glory. Nay, our author, in the midst of all
his flutter about this 28th of Matthew, dare venture to gather
no more therefrom, but that it may be strongly supposed. Behold
therefore, gentle reader, the ground on which these brethren lay
the stress of their separation from their fellows, is nothing else
but a supposition, without warrant, screwed out of this blessed
word of God. Strongly supposed! but may it not be as strongly
supposed that the presence and blessing of the Lord Jesus, with
his ministers, is laid upon the same ground also? for thus he
concludes the text, 'And lo, I am with you alway even unto the
end of the world.' But would, I say, any man from these words
conclude, that Christ Jesus hath here promised his presence only
to them that, after discipling, baptize those that are so made;
and that they that do not baptize shall neither have his presence
nor his blessing? I say again, should any so conclude hence, would
not all experience prove him void of truth? The words therefore
must be left, by you, as you found them, they favour not at all
your groundless supposition.

To conclude, these words have not laid baptism in the way to debar
the saint from fellowship of his brethren, no more than to hinder
his inheritance in life and glory. Mark reads it thus: 'He that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth
not shall be damned' (Mark 16:16). Letting baptism, which he
mentioned in the promise, fall, when he came at the threatening.
God also doth thus with respect to his worship in the church, he
commands all and every whit of his will to be done, but beareth
with our coming short in this, and that, and another duty. But
let's go on.

Your second argument is, 'That the order of Christ's commission,
as well as the matter therein contained to be observed, may easily
be concluded, from God's severity towards them that sought him not
according to due order (1 Chron 15:13). Was God so exact with his
people then, that all things to a pin must be according to the pattern
in the mount (Heb 8:5, 9:11), whose worship then comparatively,
to the gospel, was but after the law of a carnal commandment; and
can it be supposed he should be so indifferent now to leave men
to their own liberty, to time and place his appointments, contrary
to what he had given an express rule for in his word as before?
(Eze 44:7,9,10). It was the priest's sin, formerly to bring the
uncircumcised in heart and flesh into his house.'

Ans. That there is no such order in that commission as you feign,
I have proved. As for your far-fetch'd instance (1 Chron 15),
it is quite beside your purpose. The express word was, That the
priest, not a cart, should bear the ark of God. Also they were
not to touch it, and yet Uzza did (Exo 25:14; 1 Chron 15:12-16;
Num 4:15; 1 Chron 13). Now, if you can make that 28th of Matthew
say, Receive none that are not baptized first; or that Christ
would have them of his, that are not yet baptized, kept ignorant
of all other truths that respect church communion; then you say
something, else you do but raise a mist before the simple reader:
but whoso listeth may hang on your sleeve. As for the pins and
tacks of the tabernacle, they were expressly commanded; and when
you have proved by the word of God, That you ought to shut saints
out of your communion for want of baptism, then you may begin more
justly to make your parallel. How fitly you have urged (Eze 44)
to insinuate that unbaptized believers are like the uncircumcised
in heart and flesh, I leave it to all gospel-novices to consider.

Your third argument is, 'The practice of the first gospel-ministers,
with them that first trusted in Christ, discovers the truth of
what I assert. Certainly they that lived at the spring-head, or
fountain of truth, and had the law from Christ's own mouth, knew
the meaning of his commission better than we: but their constant
practice in conformity to that commission, all along the Acts of
the Apostles, discovers that they never arrived to such a latitude
as men plead for now-a-days. They that gladly received the word
were baptized, and they, yea they only, were received into the
church.'

Ans. How well you have proved what you have asserted, is manifest
by my answer to the two former arguments. I add, That the ministers
and servants of Jesus Christ in the first churches, for that you
are to prove, were commanded to forbear to preach other truths to
the unbaptized believers; or that they were to keep them out of
the church; or that the apostles, and first fathers, have given
you to understand by their example, that you ought to keep as
good out of churches as yourselves, hath not yet been shewed by
the authority of the word. The second of the Acts proveth not,
That the three thousand were necessitated to be baptized in order
to their fellowship with the church, neither doth it say THEY, yea
they only, were received into the church. But suppose all this,
as much was done at the first institution of circumcision, &c.,
yet afterwards thousands were received without it.

Your fourth argument is, 'None of the scripture saints ever attempted
this church privilege without baptism, if they did, let it be
shewn. The eunuch first desired baptism before anything else; Paul
was first baptized before he did essay to join with the church.
Our Lord Christ, the great example of the New Testament, entered
not upon his public ministry, much less any other gospel ordinance
of worship, till he was baptized.'

Ans. That none of the scripture saints, if there be any unscripture
ones, so much as attempted this church-privilege first, remains
for you to prove. But suppose they were all baptized, because
they had light therein, what then? Doth this prove that baptism
is essential to church communion? Or, that Christ commanded in
the 28th of Matthew, or gave his ministers by that, authority,
not to make known to believers other parts of gospel-worship, if
they shall want light in baptism? The eunuch, Paul, and our blessed
Lord Jesus, did none of them, by their baptism, set themselves to
us examples how to enter into church communion; what church was
the eunuch baptized into, or made a member of; but where is it
said, that the unbaptized believer, how excellent soever in faith
and holiness, must, for want of water baptism, be shut out from the
communion of saints, or be debarred the privilege of his Father's
house? This you are to prove.

Your fifth argument is, 'If Christ himself was made manifest to
be the SENT of God by baptism, as appears (Mark 1:9,10), then why
may not baptism, as the first fruits of faith, and the first step
of gospel-obedience, as to instituted worship, be a manifesting
discovering ordinance upon others who thus follow Christ's steps.'

Ans. That Jesus Christ was manifested as the SENT of God by baptism,
or that baptism is the first fruit of faith and the first step to
gospel-obedience, as to instituted worship, is both without proof
and truth; the text saith not, he was manifest to be the 'sent'
of God by baptism; nay it saith not, that by that he was manifest
to others to be anything thereby: you have therefore but wronged
the text to prove your wordless practice by. Yea, John himself,
though he knew him before he was baptized, to be a man of God,
for, saith he, 'I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest
thou to me' (Matt 3:14), and knew him after to be the 'sent' of
God; yet not in, or by, but after he was baptized, to wit, by the
descending of the Holy Ghost, after he was come out of the water,
as he was in prayer, for the heavens were opened to John (John
1:30-34), and he saw, and bare record, because he saw the Spirit
descend from heaven, and abide upon Jesus, after his baptism, as
he was in prayer (Matt 3:13-17; Luke 3:21,22). Thus we find him
made known before and after, but not at all by baptism, to be the
'sent' of God.

And that baptism is the fruit of faith, or that faith ought to be
tied to take its first step in water baptism, in the instituted
worship of God; this you must prove, it is not found expressed
within the whole Bible. Faith acts according to its strength and
as it sees, it is not tied or bound to any outward circumstance;
one believeth he may, and another believeth he may not, either do
this or that.

Your sixth argument is, 'If baptism be in any sense any part of
the foundation of a church, as to order (Heb 6:1,2), it must
have place here or no where: why are those things called first
principles, if not first to be believed and practised? Why are
they rendered by the learned the A, B, C, of a Christian, and
the beginning of Christianity, milk for babes, if it be no matter
whether baptism be practised or no? If it be said water baptism
is not there intended, let them shew me how many baptisms there
are besides water baptism? Can you build and leave out a stone in
the foundation? I intend not baptism a foundation any other ways
but in respect of order, and it is either intended for that or
nothing.'

Ans. Baptism is in no sense the foundation of a church. I find
no foundation of a church but Jesus Christ himself (Matt 16:18;
1 Cor 3:11). Yea, the foundation mentioned (Heb 6:1,2) is nothing
else but this very Christ. For he is the foundation, not only of
the church, but of all that good that at any time is found in her.
He is the foundation OF our repentance, and OF our faith towards
God (vv 1,2). Further, baptisms are not here mentioned with
respect to the act in water, but of the doctrine; that is, the
signification thereof. 'The doctrine of baptisms.' And observe,
neither faith, nor repentance, nor baptisms, are called here
foundations: Another thing, for a foundation, is here by the Holy
Ghost intended, even a foundation for them all: a foundation of
faith, of repentance, of the doctrine of baptisms, of the resurrection
of the dead, and of eternal judgment. And this foundation is Jesus
Christ himself, and these are the first principles, the milk, the
A, B, C, and the beginning of Christian religion in the world.
I dare not say, No matter whether water baptism be practised or
no. But it is not a stone in the foundation of a church, no not
respecting order; it is not, to another, a sign of my sonship
with God; it is not the door into fellowship with the saints, it
is no church ordinance, as you, yourself, have testified. So then
as to church work, it hath no place at all therein.

Your seventh argument is, 'If Paul knew the Galatians only upon
the account of charity, No other ways to be the sons of God by
faith; but by this part of their obedience, as he seems to import,
then the same way we judge of the truth of men's profession of
faith, when it shows itself by this selfsame obedience. Baptism
being an obligation to all following duties' (Gal 3:26,27).

Ans. This your argument, being builded upon no more than a SEEMING
import, and having been above ten times overthrown already; I might
leave still with you, till your seeming import is come to a real
one, and both to a greater persuasion upon your own conscience.
But verily Sir, you grossly abuse your reader; must imports, yea,
must seeming imports now stand for arguments, thereby to maintain
your confident separation from your brethren? Yea, must such things
as these, be the basis on which you build those heavy censures and
condemnations you raise against your brethren, that cannot comply
with you, because you want the word? A seeming import. But are
these words of faith? or do the scriptures only help you to seeming
imports, and me-hap-soes[17] for your practice? No, nor yet to them
neither, for I dare boldly affirm it, and demand, if you can, to
prove, that there is so much as a seeming import in all the word of
God, that countenanceth your shutting men, better than ourselves,
from the things and privileges of our Father's house. That to the
Galatians, saith not, that Paul knew them to be the sons of God
by faith, no other way, but by THIS part of their obedience; but
puts them upon concluding themselves the sons of God, if they
were baptized into the Lord Jesus, which could not, ordinarily,
be known but unto themselves alone; because, being thus baptized,
respecteth a special act of faith, which only God and him that
hath, and acteth it, can be privy to. It is one thing for him
that administereth, to baptize in the name of Jesus, and another
thing for him that is the subject, by that to be baptize INTO Jesus
Christ: Baptizing into Christ, is rather the act of the faith of
him that is baptized, than his going into water and coming out
again. But that Paul knew this to be the state of the Galatians
no other way, but by their external act of being baptized with
water, is both wild and unsound, and a miserable IMPORT indeed.

Your eighth argument is, 'If being baptized into Christ, be a
putting on of Christ, as Paul expressed, then they have not put on
Christ, in that sense he means, that are not baptized; if this
putting on of Christ, doth not respect the visibility of Christianity;
assign something else as its signification; great men's servants
are known by their master's liveries, so are gospel believers by
this livery of water baptism, that all that first trusted in Christ
submitted unto; which is in itself as much an obligation to all
gospel obedience, as circumcision was to keep the whole law.'

Ans. For a reply to the first part of this argument, go back to
the answer to the seventh. Now that none have put on Christ in
Paul's sense; yea, in a saving, in the best sense; but them that
have, as you would have them, gone into water, will be hard for
you to prove, yea, is ungodly for you to assert. Your comparing
water baptism to a gentleman's livery, by which his name is known
to be his, is fantastical. Go you but ten doors from where men have
knowledge of you, and see how many of the world, or Christians,
will know you by this goodly livery, to be one that hath put on
Christ. What! known by water baptism to be one that hath put on
Christ, as a gentleman's man is known to be his master's servant,
by the gay garment his master gave him. Away fond man, you do
quite forget the text. 'By THIS shall all men know that ye are
my disciples, if ye have love one to another' (John 13:35). That
baptism is in itself obliging, to speak properly, it is false, for
set it by itself, and it stands without the stamp of heaven upon
it, and without its signification also: and how, as such, it
should be obliging, I see not. Where you insinuate, it comes in
the room of, and obligeth as circumcision: you say, you know not
what (Acts 15:1,2). Circumcision was the initiating ordinance, but
this you have denied to baptism. Further, circumcision then bound
men to the whole obedience of the law, when urged by the false
apostles, and received by an erroneous conscience (Gal 5:1-4).
Would you thus urge water baptism! would you have men to receive
it with such consciences? Circumcision in the flesh, was a type of
circumcision in the heart, and not of water baptism (Rom 2:28,29;
Phil 3:3).

Your ninth argument is, 'If it were commendable in the Thessalonians,
that they followed the footsteps of the church of Judea (1 Thess
2:14), who it appears followed this order of adding baptized
believers unto the church; then they that have found out another
way of making church members, are not by that rule praiseworthy,
but rather to be blamed; it was not what was since in corrupted
times, but that which was from the beginning: the first churches
were the purest pattern.'

Ans. That the text saith there was a church of Judea, I find not
in 1 Thessalonians 2:14. And that the Thessalonians are commended
for refusing to have communion with the unbaptized believers,
for that is our question, prove it by the word, and then you do
something. Again, that the commendations (1 Thess 2:14) do chiefly,
or at all, respect their being baptized: or, because they followed
the churches of God, which in Judea were in Christ Jesus, in the
example of water baptism is quite beside the word. The verse runs
thus: 'For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God
which in Judea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suffered like
things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews.'
This text then commends them, not for that they were baptized with
water, but, for that they stood their ground, although baptized
with suffering, like them in Judea, for the name of the Lord Jesus.
For suffering like things of their own countrymen, as they did of
the Jews. Will you not yet leave off to abuse the word of God, and
forbear turning it out of its place, to maintain your unchristian
practice of rejecting the people of God, and excluding them their
blessed privileges. The unbaptized believer, instead of taking
shame for entering into fellowship without it, will be ready, I
doubt, to put you to shame for bringing scriptures so much beside
the purpose, and for stretching them so miserably to uphold you
in your fancies.

Your tenth argument is, 'If so be, that any of the members at
Corinth, Galatia, Colosse, Rome, or them that Peter wrote to,
were not baptized, then Paul's arguments for the resurrection to
them, or to press them to holiness from the ground (Rom 6; Col
2; 1 Cor 15) was out of doors, and altogether needless, yea, it
bespeaks his ignorance, and throweth contempt upon the Spirit's
wisdom (Heb 6; 1 Peter 3:21) by which he wrote; if that must be
asserted as a ground to provoke them to such an end, which had no
being: and if all the members of all those churches were baptized,
why should any plead for an exemption from baptism, for any church
member now?'

Ans. Suppose all, if all these churches were baptized, what then?
that answereth not our question. We ask where you find it written,
that those that are baptized, should keep men as holy, and as much
beloved of the Lord Jesus as themselves, out of church communion,
for want of light in water baptism. Why we plead for their admission,
though ye see not yet, that this is their duty, is because we
are not forbidden, but commanded to receive them, because God and
Christ hath done it (Rom 14, 15).

Your eleventh argument is, 'If unbaptized persons must be received
into churches, only because they are believers, though they deny
baptism; then why may not others plead for the like privilege,
that are negligent in any other gospel ordinance of worship, from
the same ground of want of light, let it be what it will. So then
as the consequence of this principle, churches may be made up of
visible sinners, instead of visible saints.'

Ans. 1. I plead not for believers simply because they are believers,
but for such believers of whom we are persuaded by the word, that
God hath received them. 2. There are some of the ordinances, that
be they neglected, the being of a church, as to her visible gospel
constitution, is taken quite away; but baptism is none of them,
it being no church ordinance as such, nor any part of faith, nor
of that holiness of heart, or life, that sheweth me to the church
to be indeed a visible saint. The saint is a saint before, and
may walk with God, and be faithful with the saints, and to his
own light also though he never be baptized. Therefore to plead for
his admission, makes no way at all for the admission of the open
prophane, or to receive, as you profess you do, persons unprepared
to the Lord's table, and other solemn appointments.

Your twelfth argument is, 'Why should professors have more light
in breaking of bread, than baptism? That this must be so urged for
their excuse: Hath God been more sparing in making out his mind
in the one, rather than the other? Is there more precepts or
precedents for the supper, than baptism? Hath God been so bountiful
in making out himself about the supper, that few or none that own
ordinances scruple it? And must baptism be such a rock of offence
to professors, that very few will enquire after it, or submit to
it? Hath not man's wisdom interposed to darken this part of God's
counsel? By which professors seem willingly led, though against
so many plain commands and examples, written as with a sun beam,
that he that runs may read? And must an advocate be entertained
to plead for so gross a piece of ignorance, that the meanest babes
of the first gospel times were never guilty of?'

Ans. Many words to little purpose. 1. Must God be called to an
account by you, why he giveth more light about the supper than
baptism? May he not shew to, or conceal from this, or another of
his servants, which of his truths he pleaseth. Some of the members
of the church at Jerusalem had a greater truth than this kept
from them, for ought I know, as long as they lived (Acts 11:19),
yet God was not called in question about it. 2. Breaking of
bread, not baptism, being a church ordinance, and that such also
as must be often reiterated; yea, it being an ordinance so full of
blessedness, as lively to present union and communion with Christ
to all the members that worthily eat thereof: I say, the Lord's
supper being such, that while the members sit at that feast, they
shew to each other the death and blood of the Lord, as they ought
to do, till he comes (1 Cor 10:15-17, 11:25,26). The church as a
church, is much more concerned in that, than in water baptism, both
as to her faith and comfort; both as to her union and communion.
3. Your supposition, that very few professors will seriously inquire
after water baptism, is too rude. What, must all the children of
God, that are not baptized for want of light, be still stigmatised
with want of serious inquiry after God's mind in it. 4. That I am an
advocate, entertained to plead for so gross a piece of ignorance,
as want of light in baptism, is but like the rest of your jumbling.
I plead for communion with men, godly and faithful, I plead that
they may be received, that God hath shewed us he hath received,
and commanded we should receive them.

Your thirteenth argument is, 'If obedience must discover the truth
of a man's faith to others, why must baptism be shut out, as if
it was no part of gospel obedience? Is there no precept for this
practice, that it must be thus despised, as a matter of little
use? Or shall one of Christ's precious commands be blotted out of
a Christian's obedience, to make way for a church fellowship of
man's devising.'

Ans. 1. This is but round, round, the same thing over and over.
That my obedience to water, is not a discovery of my faith to
others, is evident, from the body of the Bible, we find nothing
that affirms it. And I will now add, That if a man cannot shew
himself a Christian without water baptism; he shall never shew
either saint or sinner, that he is a Christian by it. 2. Who [soever]
they are that despise it, I know not but that church membership
may be without it, (seeing even you yourself have concluded it
is no church ordinance, nor the entering ordinance) standeth both
with scripture and reason, as mine arguments make manifest. So
that all your arguments prove no more but this, 'That you are so
wedded to your wordless notions, that charity can have no place
with you.' Have you all this while so much as given me one small
piece of a text to prove it unlawful for the church, to receive
those whom she, by the word, perceiveth the Lord God and her
Christ hath received? No: and therefore you have said so much as
amounts to nothing.

Your last argument is, 'If the baptism of John was so far honoured
and dignified, that they that did submit to it, are said to justify
God; and those that did it not, are said to reject his counsel
against themselves: so that their receiving, or rejecting the whole
doctrine of God, hath its denomination from this single practice.
And is there not as much to be said of the baptism of Christ,
unless you will say it is inferior to John's in worth and use.'

Ans. 1. That our denomination of believers, and of our receiving
the doctrine of the Lord Jesus, is not to be reckoned from our
baptism, is evident; because according to our notion of it, they
only that have before received the doctrine of the gospel, and
so shew it us by their confession of faith, they only ought to
be baptized. This might serve for an answer for all: but, 2. The
Baptism of John was 'the baptism of repentance, for the remission
of sins' (Mark 1:4; Matt 3;6; Luke 3:3), of which water was but
an outward signification. Now what is the baptism of repentance,
but an unfeigned acknowledgment that they were sinners, and so
stood in need of a Saviour, Jesus Christ. This baptism, or baptism
under this notion, the Pharisees would not receive (Luke 7:29,30).
For they 'trusted in themselves that they were righteous,' that
they were 'not as other men,' that they had need of no repentance
(Luke 18:9, 10:29, 15:7). Not but that they would have been baptized
with water, might that have been without an acknowledgment that
they were sinners (Matt 3:7); wherefore seeing the counsel of God
respected rather the remission of sins by Jesus Christ, than the
outward act of water baptism, ye ought not, as you do, by this
your reasoning, to make it rather, at least in the revelation
of it, to terminate in the outward act of being baptized, but in
unfeigned and sound repentance, and the receiving of Jesus Christ
by faith (Eph 1:7,8,11).

Further, A desire to submit to John's water baptism, or of being
baptized by him in water, did not demonstrate by that single act,
the receiving of the whole doctrine of God as you suggest. 'Why
did John reject the Pharisees that would have been baptized (Matt
3:7), and Paul examine them that were?' (Acts 19:2,3). If your
doctrine be true, why did they not rather say, Oh! seeing you
desire to be baptized, seeing you have been baptized, you need not
to be questioned any further; your submitting to John's water, to
us is a sufficient testimony, even that single act, that you have
received the whole doctrine of God. But I say, why did John call
them vipers? And Paul asked them, Whether they had yet 'received
the Holy Ghost?' Yea, it is evident, that a man may be desirous
of water, that a man may be baptized, and neither own the doctrine
of repentance, nor know on whom he should believe; evident, I say,
and that by the same texts (Matt 3:7; Acts 19:2-4).

You have grounded therefore this your last argument, as also the
rest, upon an utter mistake of things.


I COME NOW TO YOUR Questions; WHICH ALTHOUGH THEY BE MIXED WITH
GALL, I WILL WITH PATIENCE SEE IF I CAN TURN THEM INTO FOOD.

[Quest. 1.] Your first question is, 'I ask your own heart, whether
popularity and applause of variety of professors, be not in the
bottom of what you have said; that hath been your snare to pervert
the right ways of the Lord, and to lead others into a path wherein
we can find none of the footsteps of the flock in the first ages?'

Ans. Setting aside a retaliation, like your question, I say, and
God knows I speak the truth, I have been tempted to do what I have
done, by a provocation of sixteen years long; tempted, I say, by
the brethren of your way: who, whenever they saw their opportunity,
have made it their business to seek to rend us in pieces; mine
ownself they have endeavoured to persuade to forsake the church;
some they have rent quite off from us, others they have attempted
and attempted to divide and break off from us, but by the mercy
of God, have been hitherto prevented. A more large account you
may have in my next, if you think good to demand it; but I thank
God that I have written what I have written.

Quest. 2. 'Have you dealt brotherly, or like a Christian, to
throw so much dirt upon your brethren, in print, in the face of
the world, when you had an opportunity to converse with them of
reputation amongst us, before printing, being allowed the liberty
by them, at the same time for you to speak among them?'

Ans. I have thrown no dirt upon them, nor laid any thing to their
charge, if their practice be warrantable by the word; but you
have not been offended at the dirt yourselves have thrown at all
the godly in the land that are not of our persuasion, in counting
them unfit to be communicated with, or to be accompanied with in
the house of God. This dirt you never complained of, nor would,
I doubt, to this day, might you be still let alone to throw it.
As to my book, it was printed before I spake with any of you, or
knew whether I might be accepted of you. As to them of reputation
among you, I know others not one tittle inferior to them, and have
my liberty to consult with who I like best.

Quest. 3. 'Doth your carriage answer the law of love or civility,
when the brethren used means to send for you for a conference,
and their letter was received by you, that you should go out again
from the city after knowledge of their desires, and not vouchsafe
a meeting with them, when the glory of God, and the vindication
of so many churches is concerned.'

Ans. The reason why I came not amongst you, was partly because I
consulted mine own weakness, and counted not myself, being a dull
headed man, able to engage so many of the chief of you, as I was
then informed intended to meet me. I also feared, in personal
disputes, heats and bitter contentions might arise, a thing my
spirit hath not pleasure in: I feared also, that both myself and
words would be misrepresented; and that not without cause, for
if they that answer a book will alter, and screw arguments out of
their place, and make my sentences stand in their own words, not
mine, when I say my words are in a book to be seen, what would you
have done, had I in the least, either in matter or manner, though
but seemingly miscarried among you. As for the many churches which
you say are concerned, as also the glory of God, I doubt not to
say they are only your wordless opinions that are concerned; the
glory of God is vindicated: We receive him that God hath received,
and that 'to the glory of God' (Rom 15:7).

Quest. 4. 'Is it not the spirit of Diotrephes of old, in you, who
loved to have the pre-eminence, that you are so bold to keep out
all the brethren, that are not of your mind in this matter, from
having any entertainment in the churches or meetings to which you
belong, though you yourself have not been denied the like liberty,
among them that are contrary minded to you? Is this the way of
your retaliation? Or are you afraid lest the truth should invade
your quarters?'

Ans. I can say, I would not have the spirit you talk of; what
I have of it, God take it from me. But what was the spirit of
Diotrephes? Why, not to receive the brethren into the church, and
to forbid them that would (3 John 9,10). This do not I; I am for
communion with saints, because they are saints: I shut none of the
brethren out of the churches, nor forbid them that would receive
them. I say again, shew me the man that is a visible believer, and
that walketh with God; and though he differ with me about baptism,
the doors of the church stand open for him, and all our heaven-born
privileges he shall be admitted to them. But how came Diotrephes so
lately into our parts? Where was he in those days that our brethren
of the baptized way, would neither receive into the church, nor
pray with men as good as themselves, because they were not baptized;
but would either, like Quakers, stand with their hats on their
heads, or else withdraw till we had done.

As to our not suffering those you plead for to preach in our
assemblies, the reason is, because we cannot yet prevail with
them, to repent of their church-rending principles. As to the
retaliation, mind the hand of God, and remember Adonibezek (Judg
1:7). Let the truth come into our quarters and welcome, but
sowers of discord, because the Lord hates it (Prov 6:19), we also
ourselves will AVOID them (Rom 16:17,18).

Quest. 5. 'Is there no contempt cast upon the brethren, who desired
your satisfaction, that at the same time, when you have opportunity
to speak to them, instead of that, you committed the letters to
others, by way of reflection upon them?'

Ans. It is no contempt at all to consult men more wise and judicious
than him that wrote, or myself either. But why not consult
with others. Is wisdom to die with you? Or do you count all that
yourselves have no hand in, done to your disparagement?

Quest. 6. 'Did not your presumption prompt you to provoke them to
printing, in your letter to them, when they desired to be found in
no such practice, lest the enemies of truth should take advantage
by it?'

Ans. What provoked you to print, will be best known at the day of
judgment, whether your fear of losing your wordless opinion, or
my plain answer to your letter: The words in my letter are, 'As
for my book never defer its answer till you speak with me, for I
strive not for mastery but truth.' Though you did not desire to
write, yet with us there was continual labour to rend us to pieces,
and to prevent that, was my first book written. And let who will
take advantage, so the truth of God, and the edification of my
brother be promoted.

Quest. 7. 'Whether your principle and practice is not equally
against others as well as us, viz. Episcopal, Presbyterians, and
Independents, who are also of our side, for our practice, though
they differ with us about the subject of baptism. Do you delight
to have your hand against every man?'

Ans. I own water baptism to be God's ordinance, but I make no
idol of it. Where you call now the Episcopal to side with you, and
also the Presbyterian, &c. you will not find them easily persuaded
to conclude with you against me. They are against your manner of
dipping, as well as the subject of water baptism; neither do you,
for all you flatter them, agree together in all but the subject.
Do you allow their sprinkling? Do you allow their signing with
the cross? Why then have you so stoutly, an hundred times over,
condemned these things as antichristian. I am not against every
man, though by your abusive language you would set every one
against me; but am for union, concord, and communion with saints,
as saints, and for that cause I wrote my book.

To conclude,--1. In all I have said, I put a difference between my
brethren of the baptized way; I know some are more moderate than
some. 2. When I plead for the unbaptized, I chiefly intend those
that are not so baptized as my brethren judge right, according
to the first pattern. 3. If any shall count my papers worth the
scribbling against, let him deal with my arguments, and things
immediately depending upon them, and not conclude that he hath
confuted a book, when he hath only quarrelled at words. 4. I have
done when I have told you, that I strive not for mastery, nor to
shew myself singular; but, if it might be, for union and communion
among the godly. And count me not as an enemy, because I tell you
the truth. 5. And now, dissenting brethren, I commend you to God,
who can pardon your sin, and give you more grace, and an inheritance
among them that are sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ. Amen.


HERE FOLLOWETH MR. HENRY JESSEY'S JUDGMENT UPON THE SAME ARGUMENT.

'Him that is weak in the faith receive ye,' &c.--Romans 14:1

Whereas some suppose the receiving there mentioned, was but receiving
into brotherly affection, such as were in church fellowship; but
not a receiving of such as were weak into the church. For answer
unto which consider,

That in the texts are two things to be inquired into. First,
What weakness of faith this is, that must not hinder receiving.
Secondly, by whom, and to what, he that is weak in the faith is
to be received?

First, To the first, What weakness of faith this is that must not
hinder receiving, whether was it weakness in the graces of faith,
or in the doctrine of faith? It is conceived that the first is
included, but the second principally intended.

1. That some of the Lord's people are weak in the graces of faith,
will be confessed by all (Mark 9:24; Luke 24:25) and that the Lord
would have his lambs fed as well as his sheep, and his children
as well as grown men, and that he hath given the right to gospel
privileges, not to degrees of grace, but to the truth; 'him
that is weak in the faith receive ye': or unto you, as some GOOD
translations read it (Rom 14:1).[18]

2. It is supposed, that this command of receiving him that is weak
in the faith, doth principally intend, that is weak in the doctrine
of faith, and that not so much in the doctrine of justification,
as in gospel institutions, as doth appear by the second and sixth
verses: which shew, that it was in matters of practice, wherein
some were weak, and at which others were offended; notwithstanding
the glorious Lord who bears all his Israel upon his heart receives
them (v 3) and commandeth, 'him that is weak in the faith receive
ye,' or unto you.

Second, Therefore, here we are to inquire of the receiving in the
text, By whom, and to what he that is weak in the faith, should
be received. In which inquiry there are two parts. 1. By whom. 2.
To what.

1. To the first. The text makes answer, 'Him that is weak in the
faith receive ye,' or unto you; which must be the church at Rome,
to whom the epistle was writ; as also to all 'beloved of God, called
to be saints' (Rom 1:7). And as to them, so unto all churches and
saints, Beloved and called throughout the world.

Note, That epistles are as well to direct how churches are to
carry things towards saints without, as to saints within; and also
toward all men so as to give no offence to Jew or Gentile, nor to
the church of God (1 Cor 10:32).

2. The second part of the inquiry is, to what he that is weak in
the faith is to be received? whether only unto mutual affection,
as some affirm, as if he were in church fellowship before, that
were weak in the faith? Or whether the text doth as well, if not
rather intend, the receiving such as were, and are weak in the
faith, Not only unto mutual affection if in the church, but unto
church fellowship also, if they were out. For clearing of which
consider, to whom the epistle was written (Rom 1:7). Not only
to the church there, but unto all that were beloved of God, and
called to be saints in all ages. And as at Rome it is like there
then were, and in other places now are, saints weak in the faith,
both in and out of church fellowship; and it is probable there
then were, and elsewhere now are, those that will cast such out
of their mutual affection. And if they will cast such out of their
mutual affection that are within, no doubt they will keep out of
their church fellowship those that are without.

Arg. 1. Whereas the Lord's care extends to all his, and if it
were a good argument in the third verse, for them to receive those
within, because God hath received them, it would be as good an
argument to receive in those without, for God hath received them
also: unless it could be proved, that all that were and are weak
in the faith, were and are in church fellowship, which is not
likely: for if they would cast such out of their affection that are
within, they would upon the same account keep them out of church
fellowship that were without: therefore as it is a duty to receive
those within unto mutual affection, so it is no less a duty, by
the text, to receive such weak ones as are without, into church
fellowship.

Arg. 2. Is urged from the words themselves, which are, 'Receive
him that is weak in the faith'; wherein the Lord puts NO limitation
in this text or in any other; and who is he then that can restrain
it, unless he will limit the Holy One of Israel? And how would
such an interpretation foolishly charge the Lord, as if he took
care ONLY of those within, but not like care of those without;
whereas he commandeth them to receive them, and useth this motive,
he had received them, and he receiveth those that are weak in the
faith, if without, as well as those within.

From the example, to wit, That God had received them; whereas had
he been of the church, they would have been persuaded of that before
the motive was urged: for no true church of Christ's would take
in, or keep in any, whom they judged the Lord had not received;
but those weak ones were such as they questioned whether the Lord
had received them, else the text had not been an answer sufficient
for their receiving them: There might have been objected, they
hold up Jewish observations of meats and days, which by the death
of Christ were abolished, and so did deny some of the effects of
his death; yet the Lord who was principally wronged could pass
this by, and commandeth others to receive them also. And if it
be a good argument to receive such as are weak in any thing, whom
the Lord hath received, then there can be no good argument to
reject for any thing for which the Lord will not reject them: for
else the command in the first verse, and his example in the third
verse were insufficient, without some other arguments unto the
church, besides his command and example.

Some object, 'Receive ye one another, as Christ also received us
to the glory of God' (Rom 15:7). And from thence supposing they
were all in church fellowship before, whereas the text saith not
so: for if you consider the eighth and ninth verses, you may see
he speaks unto Jews and Gentiles in general, that if the Jews had
the receiving, they should receive Gentiles; and if the Gentiles
had the receiving, they should receive Jews, for had they not been
on both sides commanded: the Jews might have said to the Gentiles,
you are commanded to receive us, but we are not commanded to receive
you; and if the weak had the receiving, they should receive the
strong; and if the strong had the receiving, they should not keep
out the weak; and the text is reinforced with the example of the
Son's receiving us unto the glory of God, that as he receiveth Jews
and poor Gentiles, weak and strong, in church fellowship, or out
of church fellowship; so should they to the glory of God. And as
the Lord Jesus received some, though they held some things more
than were commanded, and some things less than were commanded, and
as those that were weak and in church fellowship, so those that
were weak and out of church fellowship; and that not only into
mutual affection, but unto fellowship with himself; and so should
they, not only receive such as were weak within into mutual
affection, but such as were without, both to mutual affection and
to church fellowship: or else such weak ones as were without, had
been excluded by the text. Oh! how is the heart of God the Father
and the Son set upon this, to have his children in his house, and
in one another's hearts as they are in his, and are borne upon the
shoulders and breasts of his Son their high priest? and as if all
this will not do it, but the devil will divide them still, whose
work it properly is; But 'the God of peace' will come in shortly,
'and bruise Satan under their feet,' as in Romans 16:20. And they
will agree to be in one house, when they are more of one heart; in
the mean time prays, as in chapter 15:5, 'Now the God of patience
and consolation grant you to be like-minded one toward another
according to Christ Jesus.'

I shall endeavour the answering of some objections, and leave it
unto consideration.

Object. Some say this bearing or receiving, were but in things
indifferent.

Ans. That eating, or forbearing upon a civil account, are things
indifferent, is true: but not when done upon the account of
worship, as keeping of days, and establishing Jewish observations
about meats, which by the death of Christ are taken away; and it
is not fairly to be imagined the same church at Rome looked so
upon them as indifferent; nor that the Lord doth; that it were
all alike to him to hold up Jewish observations, or to keep days
or no days, right days or wrong days, as indifferent things, which
is a great mistake, and no less than to make God's grace little
in receiving such. For if it were but in things wherein they had
not sinned, it were no great matter for the Lord to receive, and
it would have been as good an argument or motive to the church, to
say the things were indifferent, as to say the Lord had received
them. Whereas the text is to set out the riches of grace to the
vessels of mercy, as Romans 9:15. That as at first he did freely
choose and accept them; so when they fail and miscarry in many
things, yea about his worship also, although he be most injured
thereby, yet he is first in passing it by, and persuading others
to do the like. That as the good Samaritan did in the Old
Testament,[19] so our good Samaritan doth in the New, when priest
and Levite passed by, pastor and people pass by, yet he will
not, but pours in oil, and carries them to his inn, and calls for
receiving, and setting it upon his account.

Object. That this bearing with, and receiving such as are weak in
the faith, must be limited to meats and days, and such like things
that had been old Jewish observations, but not unto the being
ignorant in, or doubting of any New Testament institution.

Ans. Where the Lord puts no limitation, men should be wary how
they do it, for they must have a command or example, before they
can limit this command; for although the Lord took this occasion
from their difference about meats and days to give this command,
yet the command is not limited there, no more than Matthew 12:1-8.
That when they made use of his good law rigorously in the letter,
he presently published an act of grace in the 7th verse, and
tells them, Had they known what this meaneth, 'I will have mercy
and not sacrifice,' they would not have condemned the guiltless;
as also Matthew 9:13, 'Go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will
have mercy and not sacrifice,' which is not to be limited unto what
was the present occasion of publishing the command, but observed
as a general rule upon all occasions, wherein mercy and sacrifice
comes in competition, to shew the Lord will rather have a duty
omitted that is due to him, than mercy to his creatures omitted
by them. So in the text, when some would not receive such as were
weak in the faith, as to matters of practice, the Lord was pleased
to publish this act of grace: 'Him that is weak in the faith
receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations.' Now unless it be
proved, that no saint can be weak in the faith in any thing but
meats and days, or in some Old Testament observations, and that
he ought not to be judged a saint that is weak in the faith as it
relates to gospel institutions, in matters of practice; you cannot
limit the text, and you must also prove his weakness SUCH, as
that the Lord will not receive him; else the command in the first
verse, and the reason or motive in the third verse, will both be
in force upon you; to wit, 'Him that is weak in the faith receive
ye,' or unto you,--'for God hath received him.'

Object. But some may object from 1 Corinthians 12:13, 'For by one
spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles.' Some there are that affirm this to be meant of water
baptism, and that particular churches are formed thereby, and
all persons are to be admitted and jointed unto such churches by
water baptism.

Ans. That the baptism intended in the text is the Spirit's baptism,
and not water baptism; and that the body the text intends, is not
principally the church of Corinth, but all believers, both Jews
and Gentiles, being baptized into one mystical body, as Ephesians
4:4, 'There is one body and one Spirit,' wherein there is set out
the uniter and the united; therefore in the third verse they are
exhorted to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. The
united are all the faithful in one body; into whom? in the fifth
verse, in one Lord Jesus Christ: by what? one faith, one baptism,
which CANNOT be meant of water baptism; for water baptism doth
not unite all this body, for some of them never had water baptism,
and are yet of this body, and by the Spirit gathered into one Lord
Jesus Christ (Eph 1:10), 'both which are in heaven and in earth,'
Jew and Gentile (Eph 2:16), 'that he might reconcile both unto
God in one body by the cross.' The instrument you have in verse
18, 'by one spirit' (Eph 3:6). 'That the Gentiles should be
fellow-heirs, and of the same body' (v 15). 'Of whom the whole
family in heaven and earth is named.' And the reasons of their
keeping 'the unity of the Spirit,' in Ephesians 4:3 is laid down
in verses 4, 5 being 'one body,' 'one Spirit,' having 'one hope,'
'one Lord,' 'one faith,' 'one baptism,' whether they were Jews
or Gentiles, such as were in heaven or in earth, which CANNOT be
meant of water baptism, for in that sense they had not all one
baptism, nor admitted and united thereby. So in 1 Corinthians 12:13,
'For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been
all made to drink into one Spirit'; which cannot be meant of water
baptism, in regard all the body of Christ, Jews and Gentiles, bond
and free, partook not thereof.

Object. But Ephesians 4:5 saith, there is but 'one baptism'; and
by what hath been said, if granted, water baptism will be excluded,
or else there is more baptisms than one.

Ans. It followeth not that because the Spirit will have no
corrival, that therefore other things may not be in their places.
That because the Spirit of God taketh the pre-eminence, therefore
other things may not be subservient (1 John 2:27). The apostle
tells them, That the anointing which they have received of him,
abideth in them; and you need not, saith he, 'that any man teach
you, but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things.' By
this some may think John excludes the ministry; no such matter,
though the Holy Ghost had confirmed and instructed them so in the
truth of the gospel, as that they were furnished against seducers
in verse 26 yet you see John goes on still teaching them in many
things: as also in Ephesians 4:11-13, 'He gave some, apostles;--some
evangelists, and some pastors, and teachers; for the perfecting
of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.' So in the
Spirit's baptism, though it have the pre-eminence, and appropriateth
some things, as peculiar to itself, it doth not thereby destroy
the use and end of water baptism, or any other ordinance in its
place: for water baptism is a means to increase grace, and in it,
and by it sanctification is forwarded, and remission of sins more
cleared and witnessed; yet the giving grace, and regenerating and
renewing, is the Holy Spirit's peculiar. Consider (Titus 3:5),
'By the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost';
Baptism being the outward sign of the inward graces wrought by
the Spirit, a representation or figure, as in 1 Peter 3:21, 'The
like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us [not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God,] by the resurrection of Jesus Christ';
not excluding water baptism; but shewing, That the spiritual part
is chiefly to be looked at: though such as slight water baptism,
as the Pharisees and lawyers did (Luke 7:30), reject the counsel
of God against themselves, not being baptized. And such as would
set water baptism in the Spirit's place, exalt a duty against the
deity and dignity of the Spirit, and to give the glory due unto
him, as God blessed for ever, unto a duty.

By which mistake of setting up water baptism in the Spirit's place,
and assigning it a work, which was never appointed unto it; of
forming the body of Christ, either in general, as in 1 Corinthians
12:13; Ephesians 4:5 or as to particular churches of Christ, we
may see the fruit; that instead of being the means of uniting as
the Spirit doth; that it hath not only rent his seamless coat,
but divided his body which he hath purchased with his own blood,
and opposed that great design of Father, Son, and Spirit, in uniting
poor saints, thereby pulling in pieces what the Spirit hath put
together. 'Him that is weak in the faith receive ye,--for God hath
received him'; being such as the Spirit had baptized and admitted
of the body of Christ, he would have his churches receive them
also: whose baptism is the ONLY baptism, and so is called the
ONE baptism. Therefore consider, whether such a practice, hath
a command or an example, that persons must be joined into church
fellowship by water baptism; for John baptized many, yet he did
not baptize some into one church, and some into another, nor all
into one church, as the church of Rome doth. And into what church
did Philip baptize the eunuch, or the apostle the jailor and his
house? And all the rest they baptized, were they not left free to
join themselves for their convenience and edification? All which
I leave to consideration. I might have named some inconveniences,
if not absurdities that would follow the assertion: as to father
the mistakes of the baptizers on the Spirit's act, who is not
mistaken in any HE baptizeth; no false brethren creep in unawares
into the mystical body by him; and also, how this manner of forming
churches would suit a country, where many are converted, and
willing to be baptized; but there being no church to be baptized
into, how shall such a church state begin? The first must be
baptized into no church, and the rest into him as the church, or
the work stand still for want of a church.

Object. 'But God is a God of order, and hath ordained order in
all the churches of Christ; and for to receive one that holds the
baptism he had in his infancy, there is no command nor example
for, and by the same rule children will be brought in to be church
members.'

Ans. That God is a God of order, and hath ordained orders in all
the churches of Christ is true; and that this is one of the orders
to receive him that is weak in the faith, is as true. And though
there be no example or command, in so many words, receive such an
one that holds the baptism he had in his infancy, nor to reject
such a one: but there is a command to receive him that is weak in
the faith, without limitation, and it is like this might not be
a doubt in those days, and so not spoken of in particular.

But the Lord provides a remedy for all times in the text, 'Him
that is weak in the faith receive ye'; for else receiving would
not be upon the account of saintship; but upon knowing, and doing
all things according to rule and order, and that must be perfectly,
else for to deny any thing, or to affirm too much is disorderly,
and would hinder receiving: but the Lord seals not so with his
people, but accounts 'LOVE the fulfilling of the law,' though
they be ignorant in many things both as to knowing and doing; and
receives them into communion and fellowship with himself, and
would have others do the same also. And if he would have so much
bearing in the apostle's days, when they had infallible helps to
expound truths unto them, much more now, the church hath been so
long in the wilderness and in captivity, and not that his people
should be driven away in the dark day, though they are sick and
weak (Eze 34:16,21). And that it should be supposed such tenderness
would bring in children in age to be church members, yea and
welcome, if any body could prove them in the faith, though never
so weak; for the text is, 'Him that is weak in the faith, receive
ye': It is not He, and his wife and children, unless it can be
proved they are IN THE FAITH.

Object. 'By this, some ordinances may be lost or omitted, and is
it to be supposed the Lord would suffer any of his ordinances to
be lost or omitted in the Old or New Testament, or the right use
of them, and yet own such for true churches, and what reason can
there be for it.?'

Ans. The Lord hath suffered some ordinances to be omitted and lost
in the Old Testament, and yet owned the church. Though circumcision
were omitted in the wilderness, yet he owned them to be his
church (Acts 7:38); and many of the ordinances were lost in the
captivity: see Ainsworth upon Exodus 28, 30 &c. which shewed what
the high-priest was to put on, and were not to be omitted upon
pain of death, as the Urim and Thummim, yet being lost, and several
other ordinances, the ark, with the mercy-seat and cherubims, the
fire from heaven, the majesty and divine presence, &c. yet, he
owns the second temple, though short of the first, and filled it
with his glory, and honoured it with his Son, being a member and
a minister therein (Mal 3:1), 'The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly
come to his temple': So in the New Testament, since their wilderness
condition, and great and long captivity, there is some darkness
and doubts, and want of light in the best of the Lord's people,
in many of his ordinances, and that for several ages, and yet how
hath the Lord owned them for his churches, wherein he is to have
glory and praise 'throughout all ages' (Eph 3:21). And so should
we own them, unless we will condemn the generation of the just.
It must be confessed, That if exact practice be required, and
clearness in gospel institutions before communion; who dare be
so bold as to say his hands are clean, and that he hath done all
the Lord's commands, as to institutions in his worship? and must
not confess the change of times doth necessitate some variation,
if not alteration, either in the matter or manner of things
according to primitive practice; yet owned for true churches, and
received as visible saints, though ignorant either wholly, or in
great measure, in laying on of hands, singing, washing of feet,
and anointing with oil, in the gifts of the Spirit, which is the
Urim and Thummim of the gospel. And it cannot be proved, that the
churches were so ignorant in the primitive times, nor yet that
such were received into fellowship; yet now herein it is thought
meet their should be bearing, and why not in baptism, especially
in such as own it for an ordinance, though in some things miss it,
and do yet shew their love unto it, and unto the Lord, and unto
his law therein, that they could be willing to die for it rather
than to deny it; and to be baptized in their blood; which sheweth,
they hold it in conscience their duty, while they have further light
from above, and are willing to hear and obey as far as they know,
though weak in the faith, as to clearness in gospel institutions:
surely the text is on their side, or else it will exclude all the
former, 'Him that is weak in the faith receive ye,--but not to
doubtful disputations' (Rom 14:5). Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own mind, and such the Lord hath received.

As to the query, What reason is there, why the Lord should suffer
any of his ordinances to be lost?

Ans. If there were no reason to be shewn, it should teach us
silence, for he doth nothing without the highest reason; and there
doth appear some reasons in the Old Testament, why those ordinances
of Urim and Thummim, &c. were suffered to be lost in the captivity,
that they might long and look for the Lord Jesus, the priest,
that was to stand up with Urim and Thummim (Ezra 2:63; Neh 7:65),
which the Lord by this puts them upon the hoping for, and to be
in the expectation of so great a mercy, which was the promise of
the Old Testament, and all the churches losses in the New Testament.
By all the dark night of ignorance she hath been in, and long
captivity she hath been under, and in her wandering wilderness
state, wherein she hath rather been fed with manna from heaven,
than by men upon earth; and after all her crosses and losses, the
Lord lets light break in by degrees, and deliverance by little
and little; and she is 'coming out of the wilderness leaning upon
her beloved'; and the Lord hath given the valley of Achor for
a door of hope, that ere long she may receive the promise of the
gospel richly, by the Spirit, to be poured upon us from on high (Isa
32:15), and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful
field become a forest, and then the Lord will take away the covering
cast over all people (Isa 25:7), and the vail that is spread
over all nations (Isa 11:9); 'For the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea' (v 13). Then
'Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.'
Thus will the God of peace bruise Satan under foot shortly; and one
reason why the Lord may suffer all this darkness and differences
that have been, and yet are, is, that we might long and look for
this blessed promise of the gospel, the pourings out of the Spirit.

Object. But many authors do judge, that the weak and strong were
all in church fellowship before, and that the receiving (Rom 14:1)
was but into mutual affection.

Ans. It ought to be seriously weighed how any differ from so many
worthy authors, is confessed; to whom the world is so much beholden
for their help in many things; but it would be of dangerous
consequence to take all for granted they say, and unlike the noble
Bereans (Acts 17:11). Though they had some infallible teachers,
yet they took not their words or doctrine upon trust; and there
may be more ground to question expositors on this text, in regard
their principles necessitate them to judge that the sense; for if
it be in their judgments a duty to compel all to come in, and to
receive all, and their children, they must needs judge by that
text, they were all of the church, and in fellowship, before their
scrupling meats and days, because that is an act of grown persons
at years of discretion; and therefore the receiving is judged by
them to be only into mutual affection, for it is impossible for
them to hold their opinion, and judge otherwise of the text; for
in baptism, they judge infants should be received into church
fellowship; and then scrupling meats and days must needs be after
joining. Their judgments might as well be taken, that it is a duty
to baptize infants, as that they can judge of this text rightly,
and hold their practice.

Object. But no uncircumcised person was to eat the passover (Exo
12). And doth not the Lord as well require the sign of baptism now,
as of circumcision then? and is there not like reason for it?

Ans. The Lord, in the Old Testament, expressly commanded
no uncircumcised person should eat the passover (Exo 12:48; Eze
44:9), that no stranger, uncircumcised in heart, or uncircumcised
in flesh, should enter into his sanctuary.[20] And had the Lord
commanded, that no unbaptized person should enter into his churches,
it had been clear. And no doubt, Christ was as faithful as a son
in all his house, as Moses was as a servant; and although there
had been little reason, if the Lord had commanded it so to be,
yet in God's worship we must not make the likeness of any thing
in our reason, but the will of God, the ground of duty; for upon
such a foundation some would build the baptizing of infants,
because it would be like unto circumcision, and so break the
second commandment, in making the likeness of things of their own
contrivance, of force with institutions in the worship of God.

The most that I think can be said is, That we have no gospel
example for receiving without baptism, or rejecting any for want
of it. Therefore it is desired, what hath been said, may be
considered; lest while we look for an example, we do not overlook
a command upon a mistake, supposing that they were all in church
fellowship before; whereas the text saith not so, but 'Him that
is weak in the faith receive ye,' or unto you.

We may see also how the Lord proceeds under the law, though he
accounts those things that were done contrary to his law, sinful,
though done ignorantly; yet never required the offender to offer
sacrifice till he knew thereof (Lev 5:5 compared with vv 15,16).
And that may be a man's own sin through his ignorance; that though
it may be another's duty to endeavour to inform him in, yet not
thereupon to keep him out of his Father's house; for surely the
Lord would not have any of his children kept out, without we have
a word for it. And though they scruple some meats in their Father's
house, yet it may be dangerous for the stronger children to deny
them all the rest of the dainties therein, till the weak and sick
can eat strong meat; whereas Peter had meat for one, and milk for
another; and Peter must feed the poor lambs as well as the sheep;
and if others will not do it, the great shepherd will come ere long
and look up what hath been driven away (Eze 34:4,11; Isa 40:11).
He will feed his flock like a shepherd; he shall gather the lambs
into his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young.



FOOTNOTES:

1. Who is there that reads these revilings of Bunyan for his poverty
and mean descent, but must be struck with the unsearchable wisdom
of the Almighty. The salvation of the church requires that 'GOD
should be manifest in the flesh.' Does he appear in his glory? Does
he honour riches, and power, and wisdom, by descending in one of
these classes? No; the poor, the despised in this world, claim
kindred with him--'Is not this the carpenter's son?' 'Have any of
the rulers or pharisees believed on him?' Even with these examples
before them, his Baptist ministerial brethren, who sat at his
feet when he came to London, and listened to his eloquence, now,
in their hot dispute, revile and taunt him with his imprisonment--his
poverty--his want of book learning. Refused the communion of some
eminent earthly saints, it drove him to closer communion with his
God, and the prison, became a Bethel--none other than the house
of God, and the very gate of heaven; and in a holy, happy frame
of soul, he breathes forgiveness: 'What Mr. Kiffin hath done in
the matter I forgive, and love him never the worse'!!--Ed.

2. How do these verses cut down all the carnal pride of man. Who
is THE BLESSED? not the rich, or powerful, or worldly wise, but
those that delight in the word of God.--Ed.

3. Nearly all the Baptist churches of that day limited communion
to them who had been baptized in water on a profession of their
faith. It is very different now; Bunyan's principles have spread,
are spreading, and must soon become universal.--Ed.

4. Mr. H. D'Anvers: 'A seventh end of baptism is, that the baptized
person may orderly thereby have an entrance into the visible church.
None were esteemed members, or did partake of its ordinances, before
they were baptized, being so God's hedge or boundary.'--Treatise
of Baptism, p. 20, ed. 1674.

5. A modern writer, in a critique on Bunyan, says that he did as
much justice to grace as his Calvinism would allow him!! May all
the world be such Calvinists.--Ed.

6. 'Without the church,' previous to having entered into the church,
a personal obedience to the divine command; having repented, then
be baptized: neither of these are duties to be performed by the
church, as such, but individually.--Ed.

7. 'To themselves,' to the particular churches only to which they
were written. Contrary to the word, 'All scripture is given--to
be profitable to the man of God' in every church (2 Tim 3:16).--Ed.

8. To these ten commandments must be added that new command given
by the Saviour, 'That ye love one another' (John 12:34); or rather
the evangelical sum of the whole law, 'Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself.' This
happy state of mind can only be attained by the baptism of the
Holy Ghost. How awful the thought that multitudes of professing
Christians rely upon outward ceremonies, a fleshly carnal confidence
in ordinances, while they are dead as to union with God and to
spiritual communion with his saints. Reader, how is it with your
own soul.--Ed.

9. Bunyan's adversaries were wrong in stating that all the
expositors agreed in referring this 'one baptism' to be that in
or with water. John Caime, 1662, refers to 1 Corinthians 12:13,
as an illustration of Ephesians 4:5, 'One baptism,' 'by one SPIRIT
are we all baptized.' The Assembly's Annotations, 1657, infers
that 'one' means 'once,' and refers to the Nicene creed, which
says, 'one baptism for the remission of sins'; this surely cannot
mean that the application of water remits sins. Diodati, 1648, is
silent on this subject. Dr. Hammond, 1653, says, 'the same vow
to be administered to all.' Very similar to this is the Dutch
annotations of Theodore Haak.--Ed.

10. Heaven forbid that we should be afraid or ashamed of saying
that Christ is better than water baptism. Christ is the heavenly
manna, the sweet, pleasant, nourishing food of the soul. Baptism
is only once for life, but Christ is our essential food all through
the wilderness--every hour of life until we enter the gates of
the celestial and eternal city.--Ed.

11. While we acknowledge the importance of water baptism, to which
Christ submitted, yet we do well to consider that it was not
intended as a means of purifying his infinite purity; no more does
it purify the believer who follows his Redeemer in this ordinance.
He was as much a believer before as he is after the ceremony. He
submits to it as an act of obedience to the divine command, in
the humble hope that his faith may be strengthened and his soul
refreshed.--Ed.

12. 'The wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God' (James
1:20). The angry passions of man work evil. Such fiery zeal
is contrary to the spirit of Christ. The ignorant must be won by
meekness to embrace the truth.--Ed.

13. It becomes all prayerfully to follow divine commands in ALL
THINGS. Nothing is indifferent or non-essential that God hath
ordained for the believer. But if disciples differ about days, or
meats, or water, ought such differences to prevent their communion
and fellowship more than differences in personal stature, or beauty,
or in mental powers. Uniformity in anything but love to God and
to each other is a fool's paradise, contrary to the experience of
the apostolic and all ages, and opposed to every law of nature.--Ed.

14. This typographical error in 'The Reasons of my Practice' is
corrected in this edition for the first time.--Ed.

15. The doctrine of the real presence, called transubstantiation,
was the test of adherence to the Romish church, which unless all
persons pretended to believe they were sacrificed with brutal
ferocity.--Ed.

16. In Bunyan's days, both the laws of the land, the judges, and
the commonalty, gave credence to the wicked gambols of wizards and
witches. Many a poor iniquitous old woman, from some mysterious
hints of her power to tell fortunes, or to gratify the revengeful
feelings of her neighbours, was put to a cruel death. More
enlightened times have dissipated this illusion, and driven these
imaginary imps of darkness into benighted countries.--Ed.

17. 'Me-hap-soes,' a contraction of 'it may so happen.'--Ed.

18. Tyndale, and all the early English translations, rend it 'unto
you,' until the Elisabethan State Bible, called the Bishop's, in
1568. Do not the words mean that Christians are to receive such as
are weak in the faith into their hearts by love, without troubling
their heads with perplexing disputes?--Ed.

19. Under the Old Testament dispensation; the parable or history
is recorded in Luke 10.--Ed.

20. We cannot offer to God any acceptable sacrifice until spiritually
baptized. First joined to God by a living faith in the atoning
sacrifice of Christ, and then bringing forth the fruits of this
internal and purifying baptism, we must give ourselves to his
church in the bonds of the gospel.--Ed.

***

PEACEABLE PRINCIPLES AND TRUE: OR, A BRIEF ANSWER TO MR. D'ANVER'S
AND MR. PAUL'S BOOKS AGAINST MY CONFESSION OF FAITH, AND DIFFERENCES
IN JUDGMENT ABOUT BAPTISM NO BAR TO COMMUNION.

WHEREIN THEIR SCRIPTURELESS NOTIONS ARE OVERTHROWN, AND MY PEACEABLE
PRINCIPLES STILL MAINTAINED.

'Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge
uprightly, O ye sons of men?'--Psalm 58:1

SIR,

I have received and considered your short reply to my differences
in judgment about water baptism no bar to communion; and observe,
that you touch not the argument at all: but rather labour what you
can, and beyond what you ought, to throw odiums upon your brother
for reproving you for your error, viz. 'That those believers that
have been baptized after confession of faith made by themselves,
ought and are in duty bound to exclude from their church fellowship,
and communion at the table of the Lord, those of their holy brethren
that have not been so baptized.' This is your error. Error, I
call it, because it is not founded upon the word, but a mere human
device; for although I do not deny, but acknowledge, that baptism
is God's ordinance; yet I have denied, that baptism was ever
ordained of God to be a wall of division between the holy and the
holy; the holy that are, and the holy that are not, so baptized
with water as we. You, on the contrary, both by doctrine and
practice, assert that it is; and therefore do separate yourselves
from all your brethren that in that matter differ from you;
accounting them, notwithstanding their saving faith and holy
lives, not fitly qualified for church communion, and all because
they have not been, as you, baptized. Further, you count their
communion among themselves unlawful, and therefore unwarrantable;
and have concluded, 'they are joined to idols, and that they ought
not to be shewed the pattern of the house of God, until they be
ashamed of their sprinkling in their infancy, and accept of and
receive baptism as you.' Yea, you count them as they stand, not
the churches of God; saying, 'We have no such custom, nor the
churches of God.' At this I have called for your proofs, the which
you have attempted to produce; but in conclusion have shewed none
other, but 'That the primitive churches had those they received,
baptized before so received.'

I have told you, that this, though it were granted, cometh not up
to the question; for we ask not, 'whether they were so baptized?
But whether you find a word in the Bible that justifieth your
concluding that it is your duty to exclude those of your holy
brethren that have not been so baptized?' From this you cry out,
that I take up the arguments of them that plead for infant baptism:
I answer, I take up no other argument but your own, viz. 'That
there being no precept, precedent, nor example in all the scripture,
for our excluding our holy brethren that differ in this point from
us, therefore we ought not to dare to do it,' but contrariwise to
receive them;[1] because God hath given us sufficient proof that
himself hath received them, whose example in this case he hath
commanded us to follow (Rom 14:3,15). This might serve for an answer
to your reply. But because, perhaps, should I thus conclude, some
might make an ill use of my brevity; I shall therefore briefly step
after you, and examine your short reply; at least, where shew of
argument is.

Your first five pages are spent to prove me either proud or a liar;
for inserting in the title-page of my 'Differences,' &c. that your
book was written by the Baptist, or brethren of your way.

In answer to which; whoso readeth your second, your fifth and
sixth questions to me, may not perhaps be easily persuaded to the
contrary; but the two last in your reply, are omitted by you; whether
for verity's sake, or because you were conscious to yourself, that
the sight of them would overthrow your insinuations, I leave to
the sober to judge. But put the case I had failed herein, Doth
this warrant your unlawful practice?

You ask me next, 'How long is it since I was a Baptist?' and then
add, 'It is an ill bird that bewrays his own nest.'

Ans. I must tell you, avoiding your slovenly language, I know none
to whom that title is so proper as to the disciples of John. And
since you would know by what name I would be distinguished from
others; I tell you, I would be, and hope I am, A CHRISTIAN; and
choose, if God should count me worthy, to be called a Christian,
a Believer, or other such name which is approved by the Holy Ghost
(Acts 11:26). And as for those factious titles of Anabaptists,
Independents, Presbyterians, or the like, I conclude, that they
came neither from Jerusalem, nor Antioch, but rather from hell
and Babylon; for they naturally tend to divisions, 'you may know
them by their fruits.'

Next, you tell us of your goodly harmony in London; or of the
'amicable christian correspondency betwixt those of divers
persuasions there, until my turbulent and mutineering spirit got
up.'

Ans. The cause of my writing, I told you, which you have neither
disapproved in whole, nor in part. And now I ask what kind of
christian correspondency you have with them? Is it such as relateth
to church communion; or such only as you are commanded to have with
every brother that walketh disorderly, that they may be ashamed
of their church communion, which you condemn? if so, your great
flourish will add no praise to them; and why they should glory
in a correspondency with them as Christians, who yet count them
under such deadly sin, which will not by any means, as they now
stand, suffer you to admit them to their Father's table, to me is
not easy to believe.

Farther, Your christian correspondency, as you call it, will not
keep you now and then, from fingering some of their members from
them; nor from teaching them that you so take away, to judge and
condemn them that are left behind: Now who boasteth in this besides
yourself, I know not.

Touching Mr. Jesse's judgment in the case in hand, you know it
condemneth your practice; and since in your first, you have called
for an author's testimony, I have presented you with one, whose
arguments you have not condemned.

For your insinuating my abusive and unworthy behaviour, as the cause
of the brethren's attempting to break our Christian communion; it
is not only false but ridiculous. False; for they have attempted to
make me also one of their disciples, and sent to me, and for me
for that purpose. Besides, it is ridiculous; surely their pretended
order, and as they call it, our disorder, was the cause; or they
must render themselves very malicious, to seek the overthrow of a
whole congregation, for, if it had been so, the unworthy behaviour
of one.

Now, since you tell me 'That Mr. Kiffin hath no need of my forgiveness
for the wrong he hath done me in his epistle.'

I ask, did he tell you so? But let it lie as it doth; I will at
this time turn his argument upon him, and desire his direct answer:
There being no precept, precedent or example for Mr. Kiffin to
exclude his holy brethren from Christian communion that differ
with him about baptism, he ought not to do it; but there is neither
precept, precedent, nor example; therefore, &c.

You blame me for writing his name at length: but I know he is not
ashamed of his name: and for you, though at the remotest rate, to
insinuate it, must needs be damage to him.

Your artificial squibbling[2] suggestions to the world about myself,
imprisonment, and the like I freely bind unto me as an ornament
among the rest of my reproaches, till the Lord shall wipe them
off at his coming. But they are no argument that you have a word
that binds you to exclude the holy brethren communion.

Now what if, as you suggest, the sober Dr. Owen, though he told
me and others at first he would write an epistle to my book, yet
waved it afterwards; this is also to my advantage; because it was
through the earnest solicitations of several of you that at that
time stopped his hand; And perhaps it was more for the glory of
God that truth should go naked into the world, than as seconded
by so mighty an armour-bearer as he.

You tell me also, that some of the sober Independents have shewed
dislike to my writing on this subject: What then? If I should also
say, as I can without lying, that several of the Baptists have
wished yours burnt before it had come to light; is your book ever
the worse for that?

You tell us, you meddle not with Presbyterians, Independents, mixed
Communionists (a new name), but are for liberty for all according
to their light.

Ans. I ask then, suppose an holy man of God, that differeth from
you, as those above-named do, in the manner of water baptism;
I say, suppose such an one should desire communion with you, yet
abiding by his own light, as to the thing in question, Would you
receive him to fellowship? If no, do you not dissemble?

But you add, 'If unbaptized believers do not walk with us, they
may walk with them with whom they are better agreed.'

Ans. Then it seems you do but flatter them. You are not, for all
you pretend to give them their liberty, agreed they should have it
with you. Thus do the Papists give the Protestants their liberty,
because they can neither will nor choose.

Again, But do you not follow them with clamours and out-cries, that
their communion, even amongst themselves, is unwarrantable? Now,
how then do you give them their liberty? Nay, do not even these
things declare that you would take it away if you could?

'For the time that I have been a Baptist (say you ) I do not
remember that ever I knew that one unbaptized person did so much
as offer themselves to us for church fellowship.'

Ans. This is no proof of your love to your brethren; but rather
an argument that your rigidness was from that day to this so
apparent, that those good souls despaired to make such attempts;
we know they have done it elsewhere, where they hoped to meet with
encouragement.

You seem to retract your denial of baptism to be the initiating
ordinance. And indeed Mr. D'Anvers told me, that you must retract
that opinion, and that he had, or would speak to you to do it; yet
by some it is still so acknowledged to be; and in particular, by
your great helper, Mr. Denne, who strives to maintain it by several
arguments; but your denial may be a sufficient confutation to him;
so I leave you together to agree about it, and conclude you have
overthrown him.

But it seems though you do not now own it to be the inlet into a
particular church; yet, as you tell us of your last, 'you never
denied that baptism doth not make a believer a member of the
universal, orderly, church visible. And in this Mr. D'Anvers and
you agree.' 'Persons enter into the visible church thereby,' saith
he.

Ans. Universal, that is, the whole church: This word now comprehendeth
all the parts of it, even from Adam to the very world's end,
whether in heaven or earth, &c. Now that [water] baptism makes
a man a member of this church, I do not yet believe, nor can you
shew me why I should. 2. The universal, orderly church. What church
this should be, if by orderly you mean harmony or agreement in
the outward parts of worship, I do not understand neither.

And yet thus you should mean, because you add the word visible to
all at the last; 'The universal, orderly, visible church.' Now I
would yet learn of this brother where this church is; for if it
be visible, he can tell and also shew it. But, to be short, there
is no such church: the universal church cannot be visible; a great
part of that vast body being already in heaven, and a great part
as yet, perhaps, unborn.

But if he should mean by universal, the whole of that part of
this church that is on earth, then neither is it 'visible' nor
'orderly.' 1. Not visible; for the part remains always to the best
man's eye utterly invisible. 2. This church is not orderly; that
is, hath not harmony in its outward and visible parts of worship;
some parts opposing and contradicting the other most severely.
Yea, would it be uncharitable to believe that some of the members
of this body could willingly die in opposing that which others of
the members hold to be a truth of Christ? As for instance at home;
could not some of those called Baptists die in opposing infant
baptism? And again, some of them that are for infant baptism die
for that as a truth? Here therefore is no order, but an evident
contradiction: and that too in such parts of worship, as both
count visible parts of worship indeed.

So then by 'universal, orderly, visible church,' this brother must
mean those of the saints only that have been, or are baptized as
we; this is clear, because baptism, saith he, maketh a believer
a member of this church; his meaning then is, that there is an
universal, orderly, visible church, and they alone are the Baptists;
and that every one that is baptized is by that made a member of
the universal, orderly, visible church of Baptists, and that the
whole number of the rest of saints are utterly excluded.

But now if other men should do as this man, how many universal
churches should we have? An 'universal, orderly, visible church
of Independents'; an 'universal, orderly, visible church of
Presbyterians,' and the like. And who of them, if as much confused
in their notions as this brother, might not, they judging by their
own light, contend for their universal church, as he for his? But
they have more wit.

But suppose that this unheard of fictitious church were the only
true universal church; yet whoever they baptize must be a visible
saint first, and if a visible saint, then a visible member of
Christ; and if so, then a visible member of his body, which is the
church, before they be baptized; now he which is a visible member
of the church already, that which hath so made him, hath prevented
all those claims that by any may be made or imputed to this or that
ordinance to make him so (Acts 8:37, 19:17, 16:33). His visibility
is already; he is already a visible member of the body of Christ,
and after that baptized. His baptism then neither makes him a
member nor a visible member of the body of Jesus Christ.

You go on, 'That I said it was consent that makes persons members
of particular churches is true.'

Ans. But that it is consent and nothing else, consent without
faith, &c., is false. Your after-endeavour to heal your unsound
saying will do you no good: 'Faith gives being to, as well as
probation for membership.'

What you say now of the epistles, that they were written to
particular saints, and those too out of churches as well as in, I
always believed: but in your first you were pleased to say, 'You
were one of them that objected against our proofs out of the epistles,
because they were written to particular churches, [intending these
baptized] and that they were written to other saints, would be
hard for me to prove': but you do well to give way to the truth.

What I said about baptism's being a PEST, take my words as they
lie, and I stand still thereto: 'Knowing that Satan can make any
of God's ordinances a PEST and plague to his people, even baptism,
the Lord's table, and the holy scriptures; yea, the ministers also
of Jesus Christ may be suffered to abuse them, and wrench them
out of their place.' Wherefore I pray, if you write again, either
consent to, or deny this position, before you proceed in your
outcry.

But I must still continue to tell you, though you love not to hear
thereof, That supposing your opinion hath hold of your conscience,
if you might have your will, you would make inroads and outroads
too in all the churches that are not as you in the land. You reckon
that church privileges belong not to them who are not baptized as
we, saying, 'How can we take these privileges from them before they
have them, we keep them from a disorderly practice of ordinances,
especially among ourselves'; intimating you do what you can also
among others: and he that shall judge those he walketh not with,
or say, as you, that they, like Ephraim, are 'joined to an idol,
and ought to repent and be ashamed of that idol before they be
shewed the pattern of the house'; and then shall back all with
the citation of a text; doth it either in jest or in earnest; if
in jest it is abominable; if in earnest his conscience is engaged;
and being engaged, it putteth him upon doing what he can to
extirpate the thing he counteth idolatrous and abominable, out of
the churches abroad, as well as that he stands in relation unto.
This being thus, it is reasonable to conclude, you want not an
heart, but opportunity for your inroads and outroads among them.

Touching those five things I mentioned in my second; you should
not have counted they were found no where, because not found under
that head which I mention: and now lest you should miss them again,
I will present you with them here.

1. 'Baptism is not the initiating ordinance. 2. That though it was,
the case may so fall out, that members might be received without
it. 3. That baptism makes no man a visible saint. 4. That faith,
and a life becoming the ten commandments, should be the chief and
most solid argument with churches to receive to fellowship. 5.
That circumcision in the flesh was a type of circumcision in the
heart, and not of water baptism.' To these you should have given
fair answers, then you had done like a workman.

Now we are come where you labour to insinuate, 'that a transgression
against a positive precept, respecting instituted worship, hath
been punished with the utmost severity that God hath executed
against men, on record, on this side hell.'

Ans. Mr. D'Anvers says, 'That to transgress a positive precept
respecting worship, is a breach of the first and second commandments.'
If so, then it is for the breach of them, that these severe rebukes
befall the sons of men. 2. But you instance the case of Adam his
eating the forbidden fruit; yet to no great purpose. Adam's first
transgression was, that he violated the law that was written
in his heart; in that he hearkened to the tempting voice of his
wife; and after, because he did eat of the tree: he was bad then
before he did eat of the tree; which badness was infused over his
whole nature; and then he bare this evil fruit of eating things
that God hath forbidden (Gen 3). Either make the tree good, and
his fruit good; or the tree bad, and his fruit bad (Matt 7:17;
Luke 6:43,44). Men must be bad, ere they do evil; and good, ere
they do good. Again, which was the greatest judgment, to be defiled
and depraved, or to be put out of paradise, do you in your next
determine.

But as to the matter in hand, What positive precept do they
transgress that will not reject him that God bids us receive, if
he want light in baptism?

As for my calling for scripture to prove it lawful thus to exclude
them; blame me for it no more; verily I still must do it; and had
you but one to give, I had had it long before this. But you wonder
I should ask for a scripture to prove a negative.

Ans. 1. Are you at that door, my brother? If a drunkard, a swearer,
or whoremonger should desire communion with you, and upon your
refusal, demand your grounds; would you think his demands such
you ought not to answer? would you not readily give him by SCORES?
So, doubtless would you deal with us, but that in this you are
without the lids[3] of the Bible. 2. But again, you have acted as
those that must produce a positive rule. 'You count it your duty,
a part of your obedience to God, to keep those out of church
fellowship that are not baptized as you.' I then demand what precept
bids you do this? where are you commanded to do it?

You object, That in Ephesians 4:5 and 1 Corinthians 12:13 is not
meant of Spirit baptism: but Mr. Jesse says it is not, cannot be
the baptism with water: and you have not at all refuted him. And
now for the church in the wilderness; 'You thought, as you say, I
would have answered myself in the thing'; but as yet I have not,
neither have you. But let us see what you urge for an answer.

I. Say you, 'Though God dispensed with their obedience to circumcision
in that time (Gen 17; Exo 12) it follows not that you or I should
dispense with the ordinance of water baptism now.'

Ans. God commanded it, and made it the initiating ordinance to
church communion. But Moses, and Aaron, and Joshua, and the
elders of Israel, dispensed with it for forty years; therefore the
dispensing with it was ministerial, and that with God's allowance,
as you affirm. Now if they might dispense with circumcision, though
the initiating ordinance; why may not we receive God's holy ones
into fellowship, since we are not forbidden it, but commanded;
yea, why should we make water baptism, which God never ordained
to that end, a bar to shut out and let in to church communion?

II. You ask, 'Was circumcision dispensed with for want of light,
it being plainly commanded?'

Ans. Whatever was the cause, want of light is as great a cause: and
that it must necessarily follow, they must needs see it, because
commanded, favours too much of a tang of free will, or of the
sufficiency of our understanding, and intrencheth too hard on the
glory of the Holy Ghost; whose work it is 'to bring all things to
our remembrance, whatsoever Christ hath said to us' (John 14:26).

III. You ask, 'Cannot you give yourself a reason, that their moving,
travelling state made them incapable, and that God was merciful?
Can the same reason, or anything like it, for refusing baptism,
be given now?'

Ans. I cannot give myself this reason, nor can you by it give me
any satisfaction. Because their travelling state could not hinder; if
you consider that they might, and doubtless did lie still in one
place years together. 1. They were forty years going from Egypt
to Canaan: and they had but forty-two journies thither. 2. They
at times went several of these journies in one and the same year.
They went, as I take it, eleven of them by the end of the third
month after they came out of the land of Egypt. Compare Exodus
19:1 with Numbers 33:15. 3. Again, in the fortieth year, we find
them in Mount Hor, where Aaron died, and was buried. Now that was
the year they went into Canaan; and in that year they had nine
journies more, or ten, by that they got over Jordan (Num 33:38),
&c. Here then were twenty journies in less than one year and an
half. Divide then the rest of the time to the rest of the journies,
and they had above thirty-eight years to go their two and twenty
journies in. And how this should be such a traveling moving
state, as that it should hinder their keeping this ordinance in
its season, to wit, to circumcise their children the eighth day;
especially considering to circumcise them in their childhood, as
they were born, might be with more security, than to let them live
while they were men, I see not.

If you should think that their wars in the wilderness might hinder
them; I answer, They had, for ought I can discern, ten times as
much fighting in the land of Canaan, where they were circumcised,
as in the wilderness where they were not. And if carnal or outward
safety had been the argument, doubtless they would not have
circumcised themselves in the sight, as it were, of one and thirty
kings (Josh 5, 12). I say, they would not have circumcised their
six hundred thousand warriors, and have laid them open to the
attempts and dangers of their enemies. No such thing, therefore,
as you are pleased to suggest, was the cause of their not being
as yet circumcised.

VI. 'An extraordinary instance to be brought into a standing rule,
are no parallels': That is the sum of your fourth.

Ans. The rule was ordinary; which was circumcision; the laying
aside of this rule became as ordinary, so long a time as forty
years, and in the whole church also. But this is a poor shift, to
have nothing to say, but that the case was extraordinary, when it
was not.

But you ask, 'Might they do so when they came into Canaan?'

Ans. No, no. No more shall we do as we do now 'when that which is
perfect is come.'

You add, 'Because the church in the wilderness (Rev 12) could not
come by ordinances, &c. therefore when they may be come at, we
need not practise them.'

Ans. No body told you so. But are you out of that wilderness
mentioned? (Rev 12). Is Antichrist down and dead to ought but
your faith? Or are we only out of that Egyptian darkness, that in
baptism have got the start of our brethren? For shame be silent:
yourselves are yet under so great a cloud, as to imagine to
yourselves a Rule of Practice not found in the Bible; that is, to
count it a sin to receive your holy brethren, though not forbidden
but commanded to do it (Rom 14, 15).

Your great flourish against my fourth argument, I leave to them
that can judge of the weight of your words; as also what you say
of the fifth or sixth.

For the instance I give you of Aaron, David, and Hezekiah, who did
things not commanded, and that about holy matters, and yet were
held excusable; you, nor yet your abettors for you, can by any
means overthrow. Aaron transgressed the commandment (Lev 6:26,
10:18); David did what was not lawful; and they in Hezekiah's
time, 'did eat the passover otherwise than it was written' (2
Chron 30:18). But here I perceive the shoe pincheth; which makes
you glad of Mr. Denne's evasion for help At this also Mr. D'Anvers
cries out, but yet to no purpose, charging me with asserting,
that ignorance absolves from sin of omission and commission. But,
Sirs, fairly take from me the texts, with others that I can urge;
and then begin to accuse. You have healed your suggestion of
unwritten verities poorly. But any shift to shift off the force of
truth. After the same manner also you have helped your asserting,
'that you neither keep out, nor cast out from the church, if
baptized, such as come unprepared to the supper, and other solemn
appointments.' Let us leave yours and mine to the pondering of
wiser men.

My seventh argument, as I said, you have not so much as touched;
nor the ten in that one, but only derided at the ten. But we will
show them to the reader. 1. Love, which above all other things we
are commanded to put on, is much more worth, than to break about
baptism (Col 3:14). 2. Love is more discovered, when we receive
for the sake of Christ and grace, than when we refuse for want of
water. 3. The church at Colosse was charged to receive and forbear
the saints, because they were new creatures. 4. Some saints were
in the church at Jerusalem, that opposed the preaching of salvation
to the Gentiles; and yet retained their membership. 5. Divisions
and distinctions among saints are of later date than election,
and the signs of that; and therefore should give place. 6. It is
love, not baptism, that discovereth us to the world to be Christ's
disciples (John 13:35). 7. It is love that is the undoubted
character of our interest in, and fellowship with, Christ (Rom
12:10, 16:10). 8. Fellowship with Christ is sufficient to invite
to, and the new creature the great rule of our fellowship with,
Christ (1 John 1:2). 9. Love is the fulfilling of the law, wherefore
he that hath it is accepted with God, and ought to be approved
of men; but he fulfils it not, who judgeth and setteth at nought
his brother (Gal 6:16; Phil 3:16; Rom 14; James 4:11). 10. Love
is sometimes more seen, and showed in forbearing to urge and press
what we know, than in publishing and imposing (John 16:12; 1 Cor
3:1,2). 11. When we attempt to force our brother beyond his light,
or to break his heart with grief, to trust him beyond his faith,
or bar him from his privileges, how can we say I love? 12. To
make that the door to communion which God hath not; to make that
the including, excluding charter, the bar, bounds, and rule of
communion, is for want of love. Here are two into the bargain.

If any of these, Sir, please you not in this dress; give me a
word; and I shall, as well as my wit will serve, give you them in
a syllogistical mode.

Now that you say (practically) for some speak with their feet
(their walking (Prov 6:13)) that water is above love; and all other
things are evident; because have they all but water, you refuse
them for want of that; yea, and will be so hardy, though without
God's word, to refuse communion with them.

In our discourse about the carnality that was the cause of the
divisions that were at Corinth, you ask, Who must the charge of
carnality fall upon, them that defend, or them that oppose the
truth?

Ans. Perhaps on both; but be sure upon them that oppose, wherefore
look you to yourselves, 'who without any command of God to warrant
you, exclude your brother from communion; your brother whom God
hath commanded you to receive.'

My ninth argument, you make yourself merry with in the beginning:
but why do you by and by so cut and hack, and cast it as it were
in the fire. Those seventeen absurdities you can by no means avoid.
For if you have not, as indeed you have not, though you mock me
for speaking a word in Latin, one word of God that commands you
to shut out your brethren for want of water baptism, from your
communion; I say, if you have not one word of God to make this
a duty to you, then unavoidably, 1. You do it by a spirit of
persecution. 2. With more respect to a form, than the spirit and
power of godliness. 3. This also, makes laws, where God makes none;
and is to be wise above what is written. 4. It is a directing the
Spirit of the Lord. 5. And bindeth all men's consciences to our
light and opinion. 6. It taketh away the children's bread. 7. And
withholdeth from them the increase of faith. 8. It tendeth to make
wicked the hearts of weak Christians. 9. It tendeth to harden the
hearts of the wicked. 10. It setteth open a door to all temptations.
11. It tempteth the devil to fall upon them that are alone. 12. It
is the nursery of all vain janglings. 13. It occasioneth the world
to reproach us. 14. It holdeth staggering consciences in doubt,
of the right ways of the Lord. 15. It abuseth the holy scriptures.
16. It is a prop to Antichrist. 17. And giveth occasion to many
to turn aside to most dangerous errors.

And though the last is so abhorred by you, that you cannot contain
yourselves when you read it: yet do I affirm, as I did in my first
'That to exclude Christians from church communion, and to debar
them their heaven-born privileges, for the want of that which God
never yet made a wall of division between us; did, and doth, and
will prevail with God to send those judgments we have, or may
hereafter feel.' Like me yet as you will.

I come next to what you have said in justification of your fourteen
arguments. 'Such as they were,' say you, 'I am willing to stand
by them: What I have offered, I have offered modestly: according
to the utmost light I had into those scriptures upon which
they are bottomed; having not arrived unto such a peremptory way
of dictatorship, as what I render must be taken for laws binding
to others in faith and practice; and therefore express myself by
suppositions, strong presumptions, and fair seeming conclusions
from the premises.'

Ans. Your arguments, as you truly say, are builded upon, or drawn
from suppositions and presumptions; and all because you want for
your help the words of the holy scripture. And let the reader
note. For as I have often called for the word, but as yet could
never get it, because you have it not, neither in precept, precedent,
nor example, therefore come you forth with your seeming imports
and presumptions.

The judicious reader will see in this last, that not only here, but
in other places, what poor shifts you are driven to, to keep your
pen going. But, Sir, since you are not peremptory in your proof;
how came you to be so absolute in your practice? For notwithstanding
all your seeming modesty, you will neither grant these communion
with you; nor allow their communion among themselves, that turn
aside from your 'seeming imports'; and that go not with you in
your strong presumptions. You must not; you dare not; lest you
countenance their idolatry; and nourish them up in sin; they live
in the breach of gospel-order; and Ephraim-like are joined to
an idol. And as for your love, it amounts to this, you thus deal
with them, and withdraw from them, and all because of some strong
presumptions and suppositions.

But you tell me, 'I use the arguments of the paedo-baptist, to
wit, But where are infants forbidden to be baptized?'

But I ingenuously tell you, I know not what paedo means: and how
then should I know his arguments. 1. I take no man's argument
but Mr. K.'s, I must not name him farther, I say I take no man's
argument but his now, viz. 'That there being no precept, precedent
or example, for you to shut your holy brethren out of church
communion; therefore you should not do it.' That you have no
command to do it, is clear, and you must of necessity grant it.
Now where there is no precept for a foundation; it is not what
you by all your reasonings can suggest; can deliver you from the
guilt of adding to his word. Are you commanded to reject them; If
yea, where is it? If nay, for shame be silent.

'Let us say what we will,' say you, 'for our own practice; unless
we bring positive scriptures that yours is forbidden, though
nowhere written; you will be as a man in a rage without it; and
would have it thought you go away with the garland.'

Ans. 1. I am not in a rage, but contend with you earnestly for
the truth. And say what you will or can, though with much more
squibbing frumps[4] and taunts than hitherto you have mixed our
writing with, Scripture, scripture, we cry still. And it is a bad
sign that your cause is naught; when you snap and snarl because
I call for scripture. 2. Had you a scripture for this practice,
that you ought to shut your brethren out of communion for want
of water baptism I had done; but you are left of the word of God,
and confess it! 3. And as you have not a text that justifies your
own; so neither that condemns our holy and Christian communion.
We are commanded also to receive him that is weak in the faith,
for God hath received him. I read not of garlands, but those in
the Acts; take you them. And I say moreover, that honest and holy
Mr. Jesse hath justified our practice, and you have not condemned
his arguments. They therefore stand all upon their feet against
you.

I leave your 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 arguments under my answers where
they are suppressed. In your seventh you again complain, for that
I touch your 'seeming imports'; saying, 'I do not use to say as
John Bunyan, this I say, and I dare to say. I please myself by
commending my apprehensions soberly, and submissively to others
much above me.'

Ans. 1. Seeming imports are a base and unworthy foundation for
a practice in religion; and therefore I speak against them. 2.
Where you say, you submit your apprehensions soberly to those much
above you; it is false; unless you conclude none are above you,
but those of your own opinion. Have you soberly, and submissively
commended your apprehensions to those congregations in London,
that are not of your persuasion in the case in hand? and have
you consented to stand by their opinion? Have you commended your
apprehensions soberly and submissively to those you call Independents
and Presbyters? And are you willing to stand by their judgment in
the case? Do you not reserve to yourself the liberty of judging
what they say? and of choosing what you judge is right, whether
they conclude with you or no? If so; why do you so much dissemble
with all the world, in print; to pretend you submit to others'
judgment, and yet abide to condemn their judgments? you have but
one help: perhaps you think they are not above you; and by that
proviso secure yourself; but it will not do.

For the offence you take at any comment upon your calling baptism,
'a livery': and for your calling it 'the Spirit's metaphorical
description of baptism': both phrases are boldness, without the
word. Neither do I find it called a listing ordinance, nor the
solemnization of the marriage betwixt Christ and a believer. But
perhaps you had this from Mr. D'Anvers, who pleaseth himself with
this kind of wording it: and says moreover in justification of
you, 'That persons entered into the visible church thereby [by
baptism, which is untrue, though Mr. Baxter also saith it] are
by consent admitted into particular congregations, where they may
claim their privileges due to baptized believers, being orderly
put into the body, and put on Christ by their baptismal vow and
covenant: for by that public declaration of consent, is the
marriage and solemn contract made betwixt Christ and a believer
in baptism. And, saith he, if it be preposterous and wicked for
a man and woman to cohabit together, and to enjoy the privileges
of a married state without the passing of that public solemnity:
So it is NO less disorderly upon a spiritual account, for any to
claim the privileges of a church, or be admitted to the same, till
the passing of this solemnity by them.'

Ans. But these words are very black. First, Here he hath not only
implicitly forbidden Jesus Christ to hold communion with the saints
that are not yet his by [water] baptism; but is bold to charge
him with being as preposterous and wicked if he do, as a man that
liveth with a woman in the privileges of a married state, without
passing that public solemnity. Secondly, He here also chargeth
him as guilty of the same wickedness, that shall but dare to claim
church communion without it; yea, and the whole church too, if
they shall admit such members to their fellowship.

And now since cleaving to Christ by vow and covenant, will not do
without baptism, after personal confession of faith; what a state
are all those poor saints of Jesus in, that have avowed themselves
to be his a thousand times without THIS baptism? Yea, and what
a case is Jesus Christ in too, by your argument, to hold that
communion with them, that belongeth only unto them that are married
to him by this solemnity! Brother, God give him repentance. I wot
that through ignorance and a preposterous zeal he said it: unsay
it again with tears, and by a public renunciation of so wicked
and horrible words; but I thus sparingly pass you by.[5]

I shall not trouble the world any farther with an answer to the
rest of your books: The books are public to the world: let men read
and judge. And had it not been for your endeavouring to stigmatize
me with reproach and scandal, a thing that doth not become you,
I needed not have given you two lines in answer.

And now, my angry brother, if you shall write again, pray keep to
the question, namely, 'What precept, precedent, or example have you
in God's word to exclude your holy brethren from church communion
for want of water baptism.' Mr. Denne's great measure, please
yourself with it, and when you shall make his arguments your own,
and tell me so, you perhaps may have an answer, but considering
him, and comparing his notions with his conversation, I count it
will be better for him to be better in morals, before he be worthy
of an answer.

THE CONCLUSION.

Reader, when Moses sought to set the brethren that strove against
each other, at one, he that did the wrong thrust him away,
as unwilling to be hindered in his ungodly attempts; but Moses
continuing to make peace betwixt them, the same person attempted
to charge him with a murderous and bloody design, saying, 'Wilt
thou kill me as thou didst the Egyptian yesterday?' (Exo 2:14) a
thing too commonly thrown upon those that seek peace, and ensue
it (Acts 7:24-29). 'My soul,' saith David, 'hath long dwelt with
him that hateth peace. I am for peace, [said he] but when I speak,
they are for war' (Psa 120:6,7). One would think that even nature
itself should count peace and concord a thing of greatest worth
among saints, especially since they, above all men, know themselves;
for he that best knoweth himself is best able to pity and bear
with another (Heb 5:2); yet even amongst these, such will arise,
as will make divisions among their brethren, and seek 'to draw
away disciples after them' (Acts 20:30), crying still that they,
even they are in the right, and all that hold not with them in
the wrong, and to be withdrawn from (Rom 16:17). But when every
HE, hath said all that he can, it is one of the things which the
Lord hateth, to sow 'discord among brethren' (Prov 6:19).[6]

Yet many years' experience we have had of these mischievous
attempts, as also have others in other places, as may be instanced
if occasion requireth it, and that especially by those of the rigid
way of our brethren, the Baptists so called, whose principles will
neither allow them to admit to communion, the saint that different
from them about baptism, nor consent they should communicate
in a church-state among themselves: but take occasion still ever
as they can, both to reproach their church-state, and to finger
from amongst them who they can to themselves. These things being
grievous to those concerned, as we are, though perhaps those at
quiet are too little concerned in the matter, therefore when I
could no longer forbear, I thought good to present to public view
the warrantableness of our holy communion, and the unreasonableness
of their seeking to break us to pieces. At this Mr. William
K[iffin], Mr. Thomas Paul, and Mr. Henry D'Anvers, and Mr. Denne,
fell with might and main upon me; some comparing me to the devil,
others to a bedlam, others to a sot, and the like, for my seeking
peace and truth among the godly. Nay, further, they began to cry out
murder, as if I intended nothing less than to accuse them to the
magistrate, and to render them incapable of a share in the commonwealth,
when I only struck at their heart-breaking, church-rending principles
and practice; in their excluding their holy brethren's communion
from them, and their condemning of it [eve] among themselves. They
also follow me with slanders and reproaches, counting, it seems,
such things arguments to defend themselves.

But I in the meantime call for proof, scripture proof, to convince
me it is a duty to refuse communion with those of the saints that
differ from them about baptism: at this Mr. P[aul] takes offence,
calling my demanding of proof for their rejecting the unbaptized
believer, how excellent soever in faith and holiness, a clamorous
calling for proof, with high and swelling words, which he counteth
not worthy of answer; but I know the reason, he by this demand is
shut out of the Bible, as himself also suggesteth: wherefore when
coming to assault me with arguments, he can do it but by seeming
imports, suppositions, and strong presumptions, and tells you
farther in his reply, 'That this is the utmost of his light in
the scriptures urged for his practice'; of which light thou mayest
easily judge, good reader, that hast but the common understanding
of the mind of God, concerning brotherly love. Strange! that the
scripture that everywhere commandeth and presseth to love, to
forbearance, and bearing the burden of our brother; should yet
imply, or implicitly import that we should shut them out of our
Father's house; or that those scriptures that command us to receive
the weak, should yet command us to shut out the strong! Thinkest
thou, reader, that the scripture hath two faces, and speaketh with
two mouths? yet it must do so, by these men's doctrine. It saith
expressly, 'Receive one another, as Christ also received us to
the glory of God' (Rom 15:7). But these men say, it is not duty,
it is preposterous, and idolatrous; concluding that to receive
this brother, is not a custom of them, not yet of the churches
of God: consequently telling thee, that those that receive such a
brother are not (let them talk while they will) any of the churches
of God: see their charity, their candour and love, in the midst
of their great pretensions of love.

But be thou assured, christian reader, that for these their
uncharitable words and actions, they have not footing in the word
of God, neither can they heal themselves with suggesting their
amicable correspondence to the world. Church communion I plead
for, church communion they deny them, yet church communion is
scripture communion, and we read of none other among the saints.
True, we are commanded to withdraw 'from every brother that
walketh disorderly,--that he may be ashamed, yet not to count him
as an enemy, but to admonish him as a brother' (2 Thess 3:6,14,15).
If this be that they intend, for I know not of another communion,
that we ought to have with those, to whom we deny church communion;
then what ground of rejoicing those have that are thus respected
by their brethren, I leave it to themselves to consider of.

In the meanwhile, I affirm, 'that baptism with water, is neither
a bar nor bolt to communion of saints, nor a door nor inlet to
communion of saints.' The same which is the argument of my books;
and as some of the moderate among themselves have affirmed, that
neither Mr. K., Mr. P. nor Mr. D'Anvers, have made invalid, though
sufficiently they have made their assault.

For Mr. Denne, I suppose they count him none of themselves, though
both he, and Mr. Lamb, like to like, are brought for authors and
abetters of their practice, and to refel my peaceable principle.
For Mr. Denne, if either of the three will make his arguments
their own, they may see what their servant can do: but I shall
not bestow paper and ink upon him, nor yet upon Mr. Lamb; the one
already, having given his profession the lie, and for the other
perhaps they that know his life, will see little of conscience in
the whole of his religion, and conclude him not worth the taking
notice of. Besides Mr. P. hath also concluded against Mr. Denne,
That baptism is not the initiating ordinance, and that his utmost
strength for the justification of his own practise is, 'suppositions,
imports, and strong presumptions,' things that they laugh at,
despise and deride, when brought by their brethren to prove infant
baptism.

Railing for railing, I will not render, though one of these opposers,
Mr. Dan. by name, did tell me, that Mr. Paul's reply when it came
out, would sufficiently provoke me to so beastly a work: but what
is the reason of his so writing, if not the peevishness of his
own spirit, or the want of better matter.

This I thank God for, that some of the brethren of this way, are
of late more moderate than formerly, and that those that retain
their former sourness still, are left by their brethren, to the
vinegar of their own spirits, their brethren ingeniously confessing,
that could these of their company bear it, they have liberty in
their own souls to communicate with saints as saints, though they
differ about water baptism.

Well, God banish bitterness out of the churches, and pardon them
that are the maintainers of schisms and divisions among the godly.
'Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity! It is like the precious ointment upon the head,
that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down
to the skirts of his garments; [farther it is] As the dew of Hermon,
that descended upon the mountains of Zion: [Mark] for there the
LORD commanded the blessing, even life for evermore' (Psa 133).

I was advised by some, who considered the wise man's proverb, not to
let Mr. Paul pass with all his bitter invectives, but I consider
that the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God; therefore
I shall leave him to the censure and rebuke of the sober, where
I doubt not but his unsavoury ways with me will be seasonably
brought to his remembrance. Farewell.

I am thine to serve thee, Christian, so long as I can look out at
those eyes, that have had so much dirt thrown at them by many.

J. BUNYAN



OF THE LOVE OF CHRIST

The love of Christ, poor I may touch upon:
But 'tis unsearchable. Oh! there is none
Its large dimensions can comprehend,
Should they dilate thereon, world without end.
When we had sinned, in his zeal he sware,
That he upon his back our sins would bear.
And since unto sin is entailed death,
He vowed, for our sins he'd lose his breath.
He did not only say, vow, or resolve,
But to astonishment did so involve
Himself in man's distress and misery,
As for, and with him, both to live and die.
To his eternal fame in sacred story,
We find that he did lay aside his glory,
Stept from the throne of highest dignity;
Became poor man, did in a manger lie;
Yea was beholden upon his, for bread;
Had of his own not where to lay his head:
Though rich, he did, for us, become thus poor,
That he might make us rich for evermore.
Nor was this but the least of what he did;
But the outside of what he suffered.
God made his blessed Son under the law;
Under the curse, which, like the lion's paw,
Did rend and tear his soul, for mankind's sin,
More than if we for it in hell had been.
His cries, his tears, and bloody agony,
The nature of his death doth testify.
Nor did he of constraint himself thus give
For sin, to death, that man might with him live.
He did do what he did most willingly,
He sung, and gave God thanks, that he must die.
But do kings use to die for captive slaves?
Yet we were such, when Jesus died to save us.
Yea, when he made himself a sacrifice,
It was that he might save his enemies.
And, though he was provoked to retract
His blest resolves, for such, so good an act,
By the abusive carriages of those,
That did both him, his love, and grace oppose:
Yet he, as unconcerned with such things
Goes on, determines to make captives kinds
Yea, many of his murderers he takes
Into his favour, and them princes makes.




FOOTNOTES:

1. A tender conscience, jealous of grieving or offending the
Holy Spirit, is of an inestimable value. If in our conscientious
conclusions we offend others, we must leave to them an equal right
to their own conclusions without harsh judgment.--Ed.

2. 'Squibbling,' feeble, ill-natured ridicule; now obsolete.--Ed.

3. 'Without the lids of the Bible,' not within it; a popular Puritan
saying.--Ed.

4. 'Frump,' to mock, flout, scoff. 'You must learn to mock; to
frump your own father on occason.' Ironically used in Ruggle's
Ignoramus.--Ed.

5. Mr. D'Anvers, in a postscript to his History of Baptism, the first
edition, 1673, thus violently attacks his brother Bunyan:--'Having
read his book, I took myself concerned to give some short return
to it, leaving his "manifold absurdities," "contradictions,"
"unbrotherly tauntings and reflections," "contemptions," "traducings
the wisdom of Christ, and his holy appointments," to be called to
account by that band that hath so well begun to reckon with him.'
He was in prison, and his brother thus visits him with gall and
wormwood instead of consoling cordials. He goes on to confound
water baptism with that of the Spirit, and charges Bunyan with
'ignorance and folly--dangerous and destructive to religion itself,'
'contradicting the authority of Christ,' calls him 'egregiously
ignorant,' 'self-condemning.' All this uncharitable vituperation
was because Mr. Bunyan would hold communion with all those who
had been baptized into, and put on, Christ. The passage quoted is
correct, except that 'married estate' should be 'marriage state.'
So satisfied was D'Anvers with the just and Christian correction
given him for so egregious a blunder, that if he did not repent
with tears, he took special care to leave out all this absurd
reference to the marriage ceremony performed in water from his
second edition.--Ed.

6. Strife and contention--evil speaking of surmisings among
professors, are tokens of a carnal mind, injurious to spiritual
peace, and abominable to God. The envious, discontented, and
malicious, are the devil's working tools. If such die unsubdued
by divine grace, they plunge themselves into the bottomless pit.
True wisdom avid strife and contention, is moderate in doubtful
opinions, patient and cautious in judging others.--Ed.

***

A CASE OF CONSCIENCE RESOLVED; VIZ.,

WHETHER, WHERE A CHURCH OF CHRIST IS SITUATE, IT IS THE DUTY OF
THE WOMEN OF THAT CONGREGATION, ORDINARILY, AND BY APPOINTMENT,
TO SEPARATE THEMSELVES FROM THEIR BRETHREN, AND SO TO ASSEMBLE
TOGETHER, TO PERFORM SOME PARTS OF DIVINE WORSHIP, AS PRAYER,
ETC., WITHOUT THEIR MEN?

AND THE ARGUMENTS MADE USE OF FOR THAT PRACTICE, EXAMINED.

BY JOHN BUNYAN.

EDITOR'S ADVERTISEMENT.

This exceedingly rare tract was first published in 1683, and was
not reprinted, either separately, or in any edition of Bunyan's
works. The public are indebted to the owner of a copy in perfect
preservation, who kindly lent it, with a painful prohibition that
he is to remain unknown; but with full allowance to any one who
wishes to collate it with this new edition, by applying to the
editor.

At the time this case was drawn and submitted to Mr. Bunyan for his
opinion, he was one of the most popular preachers in the kingdom,
and universally esteemed in all the churches of Christ, for his
profound knowledge of the sacred Scriptures. This may account for
such a case being sent to him, in preference to those illustrious
divines, who for learning and talent have been unrivalled in any
age.

The Reformation had progressed through state impediments so
slowly, that the masses of the people were involved in the grossest
darkness. So Mr. Keach complained--"The church is but newly come
out of the wilderness of popish darkness; and not so fully neither
as to be as clear as the sun; as in due time she shall."[1]The
era of the commonwealth let loose a flood of religious light and
liberty: those who had just emerged from the darkness of Popery,
and those who had received, implicitly, and without investigation,
their religion from the formal services of the Liturgy, were now
alarmed with the thunder of faithful exhortations, personally
and prayerfully to examine the sacred Scriptures, upon pain of
everlasting death. A light so new, and so marvellous, dazzled and
perplexed those who rushed into it, without earnest prayer for
divine guidance. They were like men who had been born and brought
up in a dark, a deep, a noisome mine, when, suddenly emerging into
light, are overpowered by its splendour. Long and sharp was the
controversy whether singing ought to be used in public worship;
whether the seventh day of the week or the first was to be
consecrated; whether ministers were to be paid for their services;
and in this case, to define the privileges and duties of women as
helpers in the gospel; and it is surprising that this question is
almost as new now as it was then. It is thus stated--"Whether it
is the duty of the women of the churches of Christ to separate
themselves from their brethren, and, as so separate, to perform
divine worship by themselves."

It appears that some females in Bedford were in the habit of thus
meeting, under the advice of a Mr. K. They held prayer meetings
for special purposes, at the imminent risk of imprisonment; but
whether, in these meetings, they exhorted, or preached to each
other, does not appear. John Bunyan was applied to for advice,
which he plainly gives. He was a stern advocate for scriptural
authority in all things pertaining to divine worship; and one
who, in regarding the invaluable virtues of women, most admired
retiring modesty as the loveliest adornment of the female character.
The terms he uses, and the spirit in which he writes, intimate
plainly that his own wife, who was remarkable for her devotion to
God and her affectionate attachment to her husband, was also the
most obedient of her sex.

In this tract we find no unmeaning gallant fribbling, but the
solemn language of one who had death and judgment before his face.
He conducts the inquiry with great care, as becomes a subject of
such universal interest: and the great majority of Christians remain
to this day his disciples. The Society of Friends is an exception,
as to females being admitted to the ministry; while the Wesleyan
Methodists have gained a most beneficial influence, by embracing,
to the full extent, Bunyan's notions of rendering available the
tender zeal, in comparatively private labours, of their pious
females, in spreading the hallowed influences of Christianity.

The Society of Friends stands upon high ground in justifying its
practice in allowing females to minister in holy things. J. J. Gurney
says--"Friends believe it right, freely and equally to allow the
ministry of both sexes." His reason is--"That all true ministry is
under the immediate spirit of the influence of Christ: therefore we
are bound to make way for the exercise of the gift of all persons
that the Spirit may direct into this service. We dare not say to
the modest and pious female, 'Thou shalt not declare the word of
the Lord,' when we believe that an infinitely higher authority
has issued a directly opposite injunction."[2]

The difference arises as to the more public work of the ministry
in proclaiming or preaching the kingdom of Christ to the world.
In the ordinary ministry, by teaching the young--by a godly
conversation--by visiting and praying with the sick and afflicted--by
encouraging the inquirers and directing their way to the kingdom
of heaven,--in these important duties there appears to be neither
male nor female in Christ Jesus--all are equal.

John Bunyan would have united to a great degree with John Gurney
in these sentiments. But as our Lord appointed no female evangelists,
or apostles, or missionaries; and as the Holy Ghost has directed,
that all bishops or elders should be married MEN, it would appear
a strange innovation to place a female in the pastoral office.
Bunyan believed that God usually commissions men and not women
to this important work. J. J. Gurney fully admits that women "are
forbidden to usurp authority over the man," and therefore no active
part is assigned to them in public assemblies for the settlement
of the affairs of the church. [3] The women's meetings were
established for the purpose of exercising a wholesome care over
their own sex. [4] "That faithful women should be helps to the
men in the service of truth, as they are outwardly in civil and
temporal things." [5] And to this who can refuse his hearty AMEN.

There is too much sectarian spirit in all our controversies.
Reader, in considering this subject, endeavour to forget for the
time those opinions in which you have been trained. Examine the
question by the Word alone, and may the Holy Spirit inscribe upon
your hearts that divine record, which is to be found only in the
Christian system: "There is neither male nor female: for ye are all
one in Christ Jesus" (Gal 3:28). G. OFFOR. THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY
TO THOSE GODLY WOMEN CONCERNED IN THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.

HONOURED SISTERS,

'Tis far from me to despise you, or to do anything to your reproach.
I know you are beloved of God for the sake of Christ, and that
you stand fixed for ever by faith upon the same foundation with
US. I also know that the Lord doth put no difference betwixt male
and female, as to the communications of his saving graces, but
hath often made many of your sex eminent for piety; yea, there hath
been of you, I speak now of ordinary Christians, that for holiness
of life have outgone many of the brethren: Nor can their virtuous
lives but be renown and glory to YOU, and conviction to those of
US that have come behind you in faith and holiness. The love of
women in spirituals, as well as naturals, ofttimes outgoes that
of men.

When Christ was upon earth, we read not that any man did to, and
for him, as did the woman that was a sinner, Joanna, Susanna, and
many others (Luke 7:36-38, 8:1-3). And as they have shewed themselves
eminent for piety, so for Christian valour and fortitude of mind,
when called of God to bear witness to, and for his name in the
world: as all histories of that nature doth sufficiently testify.
They were WOMEN, as I take it as well as men, that were tortured,
and that would not accept of deliverance, that they might obtain
a better resurrection (Heb 11:35). Wherefore I honour and praise
your eminency in virtue; and desire to be provoked by the exceeding
piety of any of you, in all holy conversation and godliness.

And although, as you will find, I have not without a cause, made
a question of the lawfulness of your assembling together, by
yourselves, to perform, without your men, solemn worship to God: yet
I dare not make you yourselves the authors of your own miscarriage
in this. I do therefore rather impute it to our leaders, who whether
of a fond respect to some seeming abilities they think is in you
for this, or from a persuasion that you have been better than
themselves in other things; or whether from a preposterous zeal,
they have put you upon a work so much too heavy for you: I shall
not at this time concern myself to inquire into. But this is
certain, at least it is so in my apprehension, that in this matter
you are tempted by them to take too much upon you.

I am not insensible but that for my thus writing, though I thereby
have designed your honour and good order; I am like enough to run
the gauntlet among you, and to partake most smartly of the scourge
of the tongues of some, and to be soundly brow-beaten for it by
others: specially by our author, who will find himself immediately
concerned, for that I have blamed him for what he hath irregularly
done, both with the Word, to you, and me. I look also to be
sufficiently scandalized, and counted a man not for prayer, and
meetings for prayer, and the like; but I will labour to bear them
with patience, and seek their good that shall be tempted to abuse
me.

I had not, indeed I had not, spoke a word to this question in this
manner, had not Mr. K. sent his paper abroad, and amongst us, for
the encouraging this practice with us, in opposition to our peace.
I do not say he designed our breach, but his arguments tended
thereto; and had not our people been of a wise and quiet temper,
his paper might have set us into a flame. But thanks be to God,
we are at quiet, and walk in love, notwithstanding the LIFTS that
have been to make us do otherwise. There are also the mouths of
some opened against me for this, who lie at wait for occasions,
and shew that they are glad to take them before they are given
by me: to whom I now shew by this ensuing discourse, that I had
a reason to do what I did.

I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ: to whom be honour and glory
for ever. And remain, your faithful friend and brother to pray
for you, to love you in the gospel, and to do you what Christian
service I can,

JOHN BUNYAN.


The Women's Prayer Meeting A CASE OF CONSCIENCE RESOLVED, &c.

The occasion of my meddling in this manner with this controversy,
is this. After I had, for reasons best known to myself, by searching
found, that those called the women's meetings wanted for their
support, a bottom in the word: I called them in our fellowship
into question. Now having so done, my reasons for so doing, as
was but reason, were demanded; and I gave them, to the causing of
that practice with us to cease. So subject to the word were our
women, and so willing to let go what by that could not be proved
a duty for them to be found in the practice of. But when I had so
done, by what means I know not, Mr. K., hearing of my proceeding
in this matter, though I think he knew little of question or
answer, sets pen to paper, and draws up four arguments for the
justification of these meetings. The which, when done, were sent
down into our parts; not to me, but to some of his own persuasion,
who kept them, or sent them, or lent them whither they thought
good: And so about two years after, with this note immediately
following, they were conveyed to my hand.


Bro: Bunyan, This enclosed, was sent to me from godly women,
whose custom for a long time hath been to meet together to pray:
who hearing of your contrary opinion, sent this. It came from Mr.
K., who would desire to know what objections you have against it:
and he is ready to give his further advice. Pray be pleased to
give your answer in writing, for Mr. K. expects it.

Your friends in the Lord, S. B. S. F. Pray be pleased to leave
your answer with S. F. [6]in Bedford.


Now having received the papers, and considering the contents thereof:
I was at first at a question with myself, whether the thing was
feigned, or true; and to that purpose, writ to these women again:
but calling to mind, that I had heard something of this before,
I concluded there was ground to believe, as I do, [that it was
true, and not feigned:] And so resolved to answer his demand and
expectation. But to say nothing more as to this, I will next
present you with the arguments he sent, and then with my manner
of handling of them. Mr. K.'s Arguments for Female Prayer Meetings.

He begins with this question, Whether women fearing God may meet
to pray together, and whether it be lawful for them so to do? Which
done, he falls to a wonderment, saying, It seems very strange to
me, that any who profess the fear of God, can make any question
touching the lawfulness thereof: The rule for praying being so
general to all, and there being so many instances for the practice
thereof, upon several occasions in the word of God, for their
encouragement therein.

He next presents us with his arguments, which are in number four,
but in verity not one, to prove that thing for the which he urgeth
them: as I hope to make appear by that I have done.


First, saith he, If women may praise God together for mercies
received for the church of God, or for themselves? then they may
pray together: The proof whereof is plain (Exo 15:20,21). If it be
objected the case was extraordinary, and that Miriam was a prophetess;
To which I answer, That the danger of ruin and destruction, and
our deliverance from it, if the Lord grant it, cannot be looked
at but as extraordinary. The designs of ruin to the church, and
servants of God, being as great as at that time when God delivered
his people from the hand of Pharaoh. [7] And will call for praises,
if the Lord please to send it, as then. And whereas it is further
objected, that Miriam was an extraordinary person. To which I answer,
That the duty itself of praising God for the mercy, was incumbent
upon all, in as much as they were partakers of the mercy. And the
same spirit of Christ that was in her, is also in all his servants:
given for the same end, both to pray for mercies we stand in need
of, and to praise God for [them].

Second, If women have in imminent danger to themselves and the
church of God, prayed jointly together for deliverance, and God
hath answered and approved of the same: then may women jointly
pray together. The instance we have is famous (Esth 4:16). We there
see she and her maidens did pray and fast together, and the Lord
gave a gracious answer and deliverance.

Third, If God hath in gospel times promised the pouring out of
his Spirit to women, to that very end that they may pray together
apart from men; then it is not only their liberty, but duty to
meet and pray together. But God hath promised his Spirit to that
end (Zech 12:10-13). Which Scripture is plain is a promise of
gospel times. And it is to be noted that the text doth not in the
singular number, say He shall pray apart, and his wife apart; but
THEY shall pray apart, and THEIR wives apart. And (Mal 3:16) God
takes notice of all them that speak often together, and call upon
his name.

Fourth, If God hath so approved of women's meeting together to pray
in gospel times, as then, and at that time to take an advantage
to make known to them his mind and will concerning Jesus Christ:
then it is lawful for women to pray together. But God hath so
approved of their meeting to pray together (Acts 16:13). By which
text it appeareth it was a frequent practice for women to meet
and pray together.


These are Mr. K.'s arguments; the conclusion of his paper follows.
And besides all these particular instances, says he, what means
those general rules to build up one another in our most holy faith,
and pray in the Holy Ghost (Jude 20). But it extends to all that
believe, both men and women; unless any will say women are not to
be built up in their most holy faith. Therefore let not any hinder
you from a duty so incumbent upon you in a special manner, in such
a day as this is. Cannot many women that have used this practice,
by experience, say, they have met with the Lord in it, and have
found many blessed returns of prayer from God, both to themselves and
the church, wherein God hath owned them? Therefore what God hath
borne witness to, and approved of, let no man deter you from. Pray
turn to the Scriptures quoted, which I hope will give you full
satisfaction. Mr. Bunyan's Answer.

These are his arguments, and this his conclusion, in which I cannot
but say, there is not only boldness, but flattery. Boldness, in
fathering of his misunderstanding upon the authority of the word
of God: and flattery, in soothing up persons in a way of their
own, by making of them the judges in their own cause: the which
I hope to make farther appear anon.

For since his women in their letter told me that Mr. K. expects
my answer, I count myself called to shew the unsoundness of his
opinion. Indeed he would, as they insinuate, confine me to answer
by writing. But his papers have been I know not where, and how to
put check to his extravagancies, that also, I know not, but by
scattering mine [answer] abroad. And as I will not be confined to
an answer in writing: so neither to his methods of argumentation.
What scholar he is, I know not; for my part, I am not ashamed to
confess, that I neither know the mode nor figure of a syllogism,
nor scarce which is major or minor. Methinks I perceive but little
sense, and far less truth in his arguments: also I hold that he
has stretched and strained the holy Word out of place, to make
it, if it might have been, to shore up his fond conceits. I shall
therefore, first take these texts from the errors to which he hath
joined them, and then fall to picking the bones of his syllogisms.
[8]

But as I shall not confine myself to his mode and way of arguing,
so neither shall I take notice of his question upon which he stateth
the matter in controversy. But shall propound the same question
here, which, for the substance of it, was handled among us, when
the thing itself was in doubt among us, namely,

Whether, where a church of Christ is situate, it is the duty of
the women of that congregation, ordinarily, and by appointment,
to separate themselves from their brethren, and so to assemble
together, to perform some parts of divine worship, as prayer, &c.
without their men?

This was our question, this we debated, and this Mr. K. might have
sent for, and have spoken to, since he will needs be a confuter.
And, courteous reader, since I have here presented thee with the
question, I will also present thee with the method which I took
when I handled it among my brethren.

First, I opened the terms of the question.

Second, Then shewed what assemblies they were that used to perform
divine worship to God.

Third, And so shewed whose prayers in such worship was used, or
by Paul and others desired.


First, By church of Christ, I mean, one gathered or constituted
by, and walking after the rule of the Word of God. By situate, I
mean, where such church shall happen to be, in whole, or in the
parts thereof. By separating, I mean, their meetings together by
appointment of their own, and as so met, to attempt to perform
divine worship [by] prayer without their men.

Second, To shew what manner of assemblies they were that used to
perform divine worship to God of old. Now I find that there have
been three sorts of assemblies, in which divine worship has been
performed.

1. It has been performed in mixed assemblies; in assemblies made
up of saints and sinners. I say divine worship has been performed
in such assemblies, for, that there, the saints have been edified,
sinners convinced and converted, and made to confess their sins,
to the glory of God. Of these assemblies we read (Matt 5:1, 13:1,
23:1; Mark 4:1, 2:1, 6:2, 10:1; Luke 5:1, 8, 12:1, 13:1, 15:1,
20:1; 1 Cor 14:23). And in many other scriptures.

2. I also find that the church, by herself, or as distinct from the
world, have met together to perform it by themselves (Mark 4:34;
Acts 2:1-4, 13:1,2; 15:4, 20:7; John 20:19-26).

3. I find also that assemblies for divine worship have been made
up of the elders, and principal brethren of the church, none of
the rest of the congregation being present (Matt 10:1; Luke 9:1;
Acts 1:3, 2:17,18; Gal 2:1,2) with several other scriptures beside.
But in all the Scripture, I find not that the women of the churches
of Christ, did use to separate themselves from their brethren, and
as so separate, perform worship together among themselves, or in
that their congregation: or that they made, by allowance of the
Word, appointment so to do. Thus far therefore this must stand
for a human invention, and Mr. K. for the promoter thereof.

Third, This done, in the third place, I come to shew you whose
prayers, or by whose mouth prayer in such assemblies, as are above
proved lawful, used to be made, or by Paul or others were desired.

1. Whose prayers were used, or who was the mouth? and I find them
called the prayers of the church in general, or of the principal
men thereof in particular (Judg 2:4,5, 20:8,26; Joel 1:14, 2:15-17;
Acts 12:5, 13:1-3).

2. Also when Paul, or others, desired that prayers should be made
of others for them. They either desired the prayers of the church
in general, or of the brethren in particular (but never desireth,
or biddeth a woman's meeting, that prayers might there be made
for them). (1.) He desireth the prayers of the church in general
(Col 4:2; Phil 1:19, 4:6; 1 Thess 5:17; Heb 13:18). (2.) Or if
he desireth prayers of certain persons, he only calls upon the men
and brethren in particular; but never upon a woman by name nor sex
to do it (1 Thess 5:25; 2 Thess 3:1; Rom 15:30; 1 Tim 2:8). Nor
was, as I said, the apostle alone in this thing. Christ speaks a
parable to this end, that MEN ought always to pray (Luke 18:1).
James saith, the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous MAN (5:16).
Moses sent the young men to sacrifice (Exo 24:5). And the people
in the time of Zacharias, sent their MEN to pray before the Lord
(Zech 7:2). I do not believe that by any of these the prayers of
women are despised, but by these we are taught, who, as the mouth
in assemblies to pray, is commended unto us.

One word more, The women in the time of Jeremiah the prophet,
when they had made their cakes to the queen of heaven, (though the
thing which they did was as right in their own eyes, as if they
had done true worship indeed) and was questioned by the prophet
for what they had done, could not justify what they had done as
to the act, but by pleading, They did it not "without their men"
(Jer 44:17-19).

Thus having premised these few things, I shall now come more
directly to discourse of the question itself, TO WIT, Whether,
where a church of Christ is situate, it is the duty of the women
of that congregation, ordinarily, and by appointment, to separate
themselves from their brethren, and as so separate, to assemble
together to perform divine worship, [by] prayer, without their men?

This was our question, and this I will now give a negative answer
unto. For I find not in Christ's testament any command so to do;
no nor yet example: and where there is none of these, it cannot be
a duty upon them; no, nor yet liberty, but presumption to attempt
it.

The command, says Mr. K., is general to all. But I answer, yet
limited, and confined to order and manner of performance. Women
may, yea ought to pray; what then? Is it their duty to help to
carry on prayer in public assemblies with men, as they? Are they
to be the audible mouth there, before all, to God? No verily, and
yet the command is general to all to pray. Women of the respective
churches of Christ, have no command to separate themselves from the
men of their congregations, to perform prayer in their own company
without them, and yet the command is general to all to pray. We
must therefore distinguish of [between] persons and performances,
though we may not exclude either. The manner also, and order in which
such and such duties must be done, Mr. K. knows is as essential,
in some cases, as the very matter of worship. But we will come
to my reasons for my dissenting from Mr. K. in this. After which
I will consider his arguments, and the scriptures that he would
under-prop them with. As for my reasons for my dissenting from
him, they are these:--

First, To appoint meetings for divine worship, either in the whole
church or in the parts of it, is an act of power: which power,
resideth in the elders in particular, or in the church in general.
But never in the women as considered by themselves. Mr. K. indeed
doth insinuate that this power also resided in them; for he saith,
God hath in gospel times promised the Spirit to women to that
very end, that they may pray together, apart from men. Now if the
Spirit is given them to THIS very end, that they may do it apart
from men, then they have a power residing in themselves to call
their own sex together to do it. And what brave doings will such
a conclusion make, even the blind himself will perceive. But further
of this anon; meanwhile we will attend [to] our own assertion.
Namely, "that to call the church, or parts thereof together, to
perform divine worship to God, is an ACT of POWER, which power
resideth in the church in general, or in the elders in particular."
We will treat of the last first.

1. For the eldership, Moses and Aaron of old were they, with the
priests, that were to call the church together to perform divine
worship to God, and that both as to the whole, or as to the parts
of it (Num 10:7,8; Deut 4:14, 31:11,12; Exo 4:29, 12:21, 17:5).
Also, in after times, they were the elders and chief of the church,
that did it (Josh 24:1; Ezra 10:5-9; Acts 14:27, 15:3). Or,

2, if their calling together to perform divine worship, was not
by the elders alone: yet it was by the power that resided in the
church for that thing, who jointly ordered the same (Judg 20:8,18:
Ezra 3:1; Zeph 2:1-3; Acts 12:12; 1 Cor 5:4, 11:20). All these are
plain cases. But never, as I ever did read of in the Bible, did
women, ordinary believing ones, assume this power of the elders,
or of the church, to themselves.

If it be asked, Who did appoint that meeting made mention of in
Acts 12:12?

I answer, It was appointed by the power of the church, who, for
her own conveniency, if she cannot come all into one place at once
to perform the duty, as it is not likely four or five thousand
should, in times of persecution, which was their case, [they] may
meet some here, some there, for their edification and comfort.
Compare verse 5 with 12 and 17. Nor do I question the lawfulness
of this or that part of the church's assembling together for
prayer: though the elders, and greatest part of the brethren, be
absent. If, first, such MEN that call such assemblies are countenanced
by the elders, or church, to do it (1 Tim 2:8; 2 Tim 2:22). But
that the sisters of this or that church, may call their own sex
together to perform such worship by themselves to God (for this
is the thing in debate) I find no warrant for.

Second, Because this kind of worship, when done in and by a company,
is MINISTERIAL to that company, as well as petitionary to God.
That is, they that, as the mouth in assemblies pray to God, teach
that assembly, as well as beg mercies of him. And I find not
that women may assemble to do thus. That such prayer is a kind of
ministering in the word to standers by, consider well 1 Corinthians
14:15-19. Wherefore let them keep silence in the church, and in
the parts thereof, when assembled to worship God.

In all public worship by prayer, teaching is set on foot, two
ways: 1. By propounding to that assembly the things that must, by
agreement, be prayed for. 2. And by proving them to suit with the
will of God, that prayer may be made in faith (1 John 5:14).

1. For all such prayer must be made for the things agreed upon
first; and consequently for things that by the word are proved
good, and suitable for the seasons, persons, or things, for or
about which such prayers are made. For they that have meetings
for prayer, without this, pray at random, and not by rule.

"If two of you shall agree on earth, as touching anything that they
shall ask [according to God's will] it shall be done for them,"
saith Christ, "of my Father which is in heaven" (Matt 18:19). Now,
I say, if things prayed for in assemblies must first be jointly
agreed upon, then must such things, by some one, or more of that
assembly, be first propounded, expounded, and proved to be good
by the word. Good for such persons, seasons, or things, for which
such prayer is made. And, besides, the gifts required to do this,
if this is not teaching I am out. And yet this must first be done
to instruct all present, to help their faith, and to quicken their
spirits to, and in that worship. That they may as one man have
their eyes unto the Lord (Zech 9:1). But that this power is given
to women, to ordinary believing ones that are in the highest
account in churches, I do not believe. I do not believe they
should minister to God in prayer before the whole church, for then
I should be a Ranter or a Quaker; nor do I believe they should do
it in their own womanish assembly, for the reason urged before.
And I will add, if brethren not heretofore called by the church
to open scriptures, or to speak in the church to God in prayer,
[9] are not at first to be admitted to do this, but before the
elders or principal brethren, that they may hear and judge (1 Cor
14:26-29). How can it be thought to be meet or lawful for women,
of whom it must be supposed, that they have received no such gifts,
that they should use this power? I say, how can it be imagined
that the women should be bound of God to do this in such sort as
doth utterly exclude the elders and all the men in the congregation
from a possibility of understanding and of judging of what they
do? And yet this is the doctrine of Mr. K.; for he saith, "That
the Spirit of God is promised to women to this very end, that they
may pray together, apart from men." But God is not the author of
this confusion in the churches.

2. But secondly, As teaching by prayer in assemblies, is thus set
on foot; so every one also that shall in such meetings be the mouth
of the whole, to God, ministereth so, doctrine to that assembly,
as well as presenteth petitions to God. Else how can that assembly
say AMEN at their prayer or giving of thanks? For to say AMEN is
an effect of conviction, or of edification received of the stander
by, from him that now is so ministering in that assembly before
God (1 Cor 14:15-17). Yea, I believe that they that pray in
assemblies, or that shall give thanks for mercies received there,
ought to labour to speak, not only with fervency of words, but
with such soundness of doctrine while they mention, urge, or plead
the promise with God, that that whole assembly may be enlightened,
taught, taken, and carried away in their spirits, on the wing
of that prayer, and of faith, to God, whose face they are come
to seek, and whose grace they are gathered together to beg. Now
this is called praying and praising, to the teaching and edifying
of others, as by the scripture afore named is made appear (1 Cor
14:14-19). But by what word of God the sisters of the respective
churches may set up this way of teaching of one another in their
assemblies, I am ignorant of.

Third, The Holy Ghost doth particularly insist upon the inability
of women, as to their well managing of the worship now under
consideration, and therefore it ought not to be presumed upon
by them. They are forbidden to teach, yea to speak in the church
of God. And why forbidden, but because of their inability. They
cannot orderly manage that worship to God, that in assemblies is
to be performed before him; I speak now of our ordinary believing
ones, and I know none extraordinary among the churches. They
are not builded to manage such worship, "they are not the image
and glory of God, as the men are" (1 Cor 11:7). They are placed
beneath, and are called the glory of the man. Wherefore they are
weak, and not permitted to perform public worship to God. When our
first mother, who was not attended with those weaknesses, either
sinful or natural, as our women now are, stept out of her place
but to speak a good word for worship, you see how she was baffled,
and befooled therein; she utterly failed in the performance, though
she briskly attempted the thing. Yea she so failed thereabout, that
at one clap she overthrew, not only, as to that, the reputation
of women for ever, but her soul, her husband, and the whole world
besides (Gen 3:1-7). The fallen angel knew what he did when he
made his assault upon the woman. His subtilty told him that the
women was the weaker vessel. He knew also that the man was made
the head in worship, and the keeper of the garden of God. The Lord
God took the man, said unto the man, commanded the man, and made
him keeper of the garden (Gen 2:15-17). Wherefore the management
of worship belonged to him. This, the serpent, as I said, was
aware of. And therefore he comes to the woman, says to the woman,
and deals with the woman about it, and so overcomes the world.
Wherefore it is from this consideration that Paul tells Timothy
that he permitted not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority
over the man, but to be in silence. But to call the church or parts
thereof together, to perform solemn worship, and in such a call
to exclude or shut out the men, is an usurping of that authority
over them to a high degree. And he renders the reason of this
his prohibition thus, "For Adam was first formed, then Eve, [and
therefore had the headship in worship]. And Adam was not deceived,
but the woman being deceived, was in the transgression" (1 Tim
2:13,14). But again, it should seem, methinks, if women must needs
be managers of worship in assemblies, they should do it, as Eve,
before Adam, in presence of the men: But that I think none will
allow, though that would be the way best to correct miscarriages;
how then should it be thought convenient for them to do it alone.
If children are not thought fit to help to guide the ship with
the mariners, shall they be trusted so much as with a boat at sea
alone. The thing in hand is a parallel case.

Fourth, If the weightiness of this worship be, as indeed it is, so
great, that the strongest and best able to perform it do usually
come off with blushing, and with repentance for their shortness,
as to the well performance thereof; though they engage therein by
good and lawful authority; what will they do who are much weaker
here, and when, as Eve, they set to it in a way of usurping of
authority, and of their own head and will. To offer strange fire
with incense, which was a type of prayer, you know what it cost
Nadab and Abihu, though men, and the sons of Aaron. [Yet] Mr. K.
cries the sisters, the women, the women's meetings, and the like,
and how they have prevailed with heaven. Poor man, I am sorry for
his weakness, and that he should show that himself is so nunnish[10]
in such a day as this.

But to return, as all worship in assemblies ought to be performed
with the most exact order and solemnity; so this of prayer with
that, if possible, that is more than all the rest; and therefore
this makes it more heavy still. When men preach they have to do
with men, but when they pray in assemblies they have to do both with
men and with God at once. And I say, if it be so great a matter to
speak to men before God; how great a matter is it to speak to men
and God at once; to God by way of petition, and to men by way of
instruction. But I am persuaded if those most fond of the women's
meetings for prayer were to petition the king for their lives,
they would not set women to be their advocates to him; specially
if the king should declare beforehand by law, that he permitted
not a woman in an open auditory to speak before him.

There are also many temptations that attend the duty of praying in
assemblies, especially those that are immediately employed therein.
These temptations, they awake, are aware of, are forced to wrestle
with, and greatly to groan under. Wherefore we put not the weak
upon this service; not the weak, though they be men; not they in
the presence of the strong. How then should the weakest of all
be put upon it, and that when together by themselves. Men, though
strong, and though acting by lawful authority in this, are not able,
but with unutterable groans, to do it: how then shall all those
that attempt it without that authority, perform it as acceptable
worship to God? This work, therefore, is as much too heavy for
our women now, as that about which Eve engaged in at first, was
too heavy for her. But,

Fifth, If this worship may be managed by the sisterhood of the
churches, being congregated together in the absence of their men:
of what signification is it that man is made head of the woman as
well in worship as in nature? (1 Cor 11:3,7). Yea more, why are
the elders of the churches called watchmen, overseers, guides,
teachers, rulers, and the like? If this kind of worship may be
performed, without their conduct and government? (Eze 3:17, 33:7;
Acts 20:28; Eph 4:11; Psa 28:72; Heb 13:17).

1. Why is man made the head of the woman in worship, in the
worship now under debate, in that worship that is to be performed
in assemblies? And why are the women commanded silence there, if
they may congregate by themselves, and set up and manage worship
there? Worship was ordained before the woman was made, wherefore
the word of God at the first did not immediately come to her,
but to him that was first formed, and made the head in worship
(Gen 2:16-18; 1 Cor 14:35,36). And hence it is that women are so
strictly tied up to this headship; that if they will learn, they
must ask their husbands at home (v 35), not appoint meetings of
their own sex to teach one another. "But what must they do that have
unbelieving ones? and what must they do that have none?" Answer,
Let them attend upon those ordinances that God has appointed for
the building up and perfecting of the body of Christ (Eph 4:11-13),
and learn as the angels do (Eph 3:10; 1 Peer 1:12).

2. But I say, if they must do as Mr. K. says, they are in duty
bound, to wit, meet by themselves apart from their men, and as so
met, perform this most solemn worship to God: how shall the elders
and overseers, the watchmen, rulers, and guides in worship, perform
their duty to God, and to the church of God, in this, since from
this kind of worship they are quite excluded, and utterly shut
out of doors: unless it be said, that to watch, to oversee, and to
guide, in the matter and manner of performance of this worship in
assemblies, is no part of the watchman or overseer's work; or in
their lawful absence, the work of the principal men of the church.
Nor will the faithful and dutiful overseer leave worship, no, not
in the best part of the congregation assembled to worship, to be
performed by every weak brother, though I believe it might with more
warrant be left to them, than to the strongest among our ordinary
ones of the other sex.

Also our elders and watchmen covet, if we have unbelievers to
behold, that our worship be performed by the most able. How then
shall it be thought that they should be so silly, to turn a company
of weak women loose to be abused by the fallen angels? Can it
be thought that their congregation, since they have it without a
command, shall fare better among those envious spirits than those
that are lawfully called shall fare before the world? Watchman,
watchman, see to thy duty, look well to the manner of worship that
is to be performed according to thy commission. Trust not Eve, as
Adam did, with worship, and with its defence. Look that all things
be done in worship as becomes thee--a head, both in nature and by
office--and leave not so solemn a part of worship as prayer, in
company, is, and ought to be accounted to be done; thou canst by
no means tell how. Watch in and over all such worship thyself. Be
diligent to know the state of thy flocks, whether they be flocks
of men, or women; and look well to thy herds, and thou shalt
have milk enough, not only for men and babes, but also for the
maintenance and life of thy maidens. So that they need not go with
their pitchers to seek water there where their God has not sent
them (Prov 27:23-27). Besides the shepherds' tents is provision
sufficient for them (Cant 1:8). But, for a conclusion of this, I
will ask this man, If he doth not, by pleading for these women's
meetings, declare, that the women, without their men, are better
able by themselves to maintain divine worship, than the men are
without their elders? forasmuch as he himself will not allow that
the men should always perform worship without his oversight and
inspection, and yet will plead for the women to have such worship
in their congregation, among themselves, excluding for ever the
men therefrom. For, saith he, the Spirit is promised to be given to
them to that very end, that they may meet together to pray apart
without their men.


And now for Mr. K.'s arguments, which, as I said, are in number
four.


1. We will take the scriptures from them; and,

2. Then pick the bones of their carcasses.


Yet in my taking of the scriptures from his arguments, I will do
it in a way that is most to his advantage, making of each of them
as formidable an objection as I can against myself.

Objection.

Miriam took a timbrel in her hand, and went out, and all the
women went out after her, praising God with timbrels and dances
for their deliverances. Therefore the women of the churches of
Christ may appoint meetings of their own, as separate from their
brethren, and then and there perform divine worship, [by] prayer,
in that, their congregation, without their men (Exo 15:20,21).
Answer

1. Miriam was a prophetess: and, I suppose, that none of our women
will pretend to be such. And though Mr. K. labours to get over
this, by saying that the work of praising was incumbent upon all:
yet by his leave, judgment, and discretion, and a spirit of conduct
suitable to the duty, as we read of, was found among the women in
none but she. Why is it else said, Miriam led them forth; Miriam
the prophetess did it. Another, by Mr. K.'s argument, might have
done it as well. Thus degrades he the prophetess, that he may get
favour with the ordinary women, and prompt them on to a work that
he has a superstitious affection for.

2. But his assertion is of no weight. The women were not left in
that extraordinary service to the spirit of ordinary believers.
Nor can I count it but crooked dealing to bring in extraordinary
persons, in their extraordinary acts, to prove it lawful for
ordinary persons to do that which is not commanded them.

3. But though Miriam did go forth, or come out with the women,
yet not from the men, into some remote place in the wilderness to
worship by themselves. She rather went or came out, and the women
followed her from the place by the sea, where now they were,
after Moses, to sing as her sex became her; for she, though an
extraordinary woman, might not make herself an equal with Moses
and Aaron, therefore she came behind in worship, yet with the
body of the people, as it is said, "So Moses brought Israel from
the Red Sea" (Exo 15:22). Women, though prophetesses, must wear
some badge or other of inferiority to those that are prophets
indeed (1 Cor 11:3-9). And I choose to understand that Miriam did
this. (1.) Because the text last mentioned says so. (2.) Because
Miriam, and all the women, did sing with the words of the men,
verse 1 compared with 21. (3.) For that they did sing them after
the men, as taking them from their mouth. For, saith the text,
Miriam answered them, and so handed it down to them of her sex,
saying, "Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously"
(vv 1,21). (4.) For that she commanded the women that they should
sing the same song: hence it is called the song of Moses, not of
Miriam (Rev 15:3). (5.) From all which I conclude, that Miriam did
not draw the women away into some such place where neither Moses,
nor Aaron, nor the elders of Israel could see, behold, and observe
their manner of worship. But that she, as her modesty became her,
did lead them out from that place where they were, to sing, and
to dance, and to praise God, after the men. (6.) This scripture
therefore favoureth not this man's opinion, to wit, "That it is the
duty of the women of the churches of Christ to separate themselves
from their brethren, and as so separate, to perform divine worship
by themselves."

Objection.

Esther, the queen, performed, with her maidens, this duty of
prayer, without their men: therefore the women of gospel churches
may separate themselves from their brethren, and perform it among
themselves (Esth 4:16).

Answer.

1. Esther was in the house of the king's chamberlain, and could not
at this time come to her brethren; No, not to her uncle, Mordecai,
to consult how to prevent an approaching judgment. Yea, Mordecai
and she were fain to speak one to another by Hatach, whom the king
had appointed to attend upon the queen (vv 5-9). So she could by no
means, at that time, have communion with the church. No marvel,
therefore, if she fasted with her maidens alone: for so she
must now do, or not do it at all. But I will here ask this, our
argumentator, whether Esther did count it a burden or a privilege
thus now to be separated form her brethren, and so forced to
perform this work as she did? If a privilege, let him prove it.
If a burden, he has little cause to make use of it to urge that,
her practice then, for a ground to women that are at liberty, to
separate from their brethren to perform such worship by themselves
in their company, without their men.

2. We do not read that she desired that any of the women that were
at liberty should come from the men to be with her; whence we may
gather, that she preferred their liberty to worship with men, far
beyond a woman's meeting. She counted that too many, by herself
and her maidens, were in such bondage already.

3. Neither did she attempt to take that unavoidable work upon
herself, but as begging of the men that she might, by their faith
and prayers, be borne up therein; clearly concluding that she
did count such work too hard for women to perform by themselves,
without the help of men (vv 15,16).

4. Besides this woman's meeting, as Mr. K. would have it, was made
up of none but the queen and her household maids, and with but few
of them; nor will we complain of our honest women when the case
is so that they cannot go out to the church to do this, if they
pray with their maids at home.

5. But what if Esther did pray with her maids in her closet,
because she could not come out to her brethren. Is it fair to make
the necessity of a woman in bondage a law to women at liberty? This
argument, therefore, is erroneous, and must not have this text to
show it up; we therefore take it away from his words and proceed
to a sight of his next.

Objection.

But it is said by the prophet Zecharias, that the Spirit is promised
to be given, in New Testament times, to women, that they may pray
together apart from men (Zech 12:11-13).

Answer. The text says nothing so, but is greatly abused by this
man. Indeed, it says their wives shall mourn apart, but it saith
not, they shall do so together. Yea, that they shall separate
themselves by the dictate of God, from their brethren, to do so,
is that which this text knows nothing of. Sometimes many may be
together, apart from others; but why Mr. K., to serve his purpose,
should rack and strain this text to justify his woman's meeting,
I see no reason at all. My reason against him is, for that the
look here upon him whom we have pierced, which is to be the cause
of this mourning, is to be by an immediate revelation of the Holy
Ghost, who doth not use to tell before hand when he will so come
down upon us. But such a meeting as Mr. K. intends must be the
product of consultation and time. "I will pour," saith God, "upon
the house of David--the spirit of grace and of supplications: and
then they shall look"; that is, when that spirit so worketh with
them as to enable them so to do. Now, I say, I would know, since
this mourning is to be the effect of this look, and so before one
is aware (Cant 6:12), whether Mr. K. can prove that these women
were to have an item beforehand, when they should have this look.
But as it would be ridiculous thus to conclude, so as ridiculous
is it to think to prove his women's meetings from hence.

Nor doth the conclusion that he hath made hereupon prove more but
that he is ignorant of the work of the Spirit in this matter, or
that his fondness for the women's meetings hath made him forget
his own experience. For how can one that never had but one such
look upon Jesus Christ, draw such a conclusion from hence. And
that all those women should have this look at the same time, even
all the women of the house of David and of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, that they might, all of them, by the direction of the
Holy Ghost, separate themselves from their men to hold a woman's
meeting or meetings by themselves for this, is more fictitious than
one would imagine a man should dream. If he says that the women
have a promise to have this look when they please, or that they
are sure to have it because it is entailed to THEIR meeting, for
this seems to come nearest his conclusion: yet what unavoidable
inconveniences will flow therefrom, I leave to any to judge. But
I take this mourning to be according as another of the prophets
says, "They shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys,
all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity" (Eze 7:16). All
those souls, therefore, that shall be counted worthy to have this
look shall mourn apart, or by themselves, when they have it. For
though a man cannot appoint to himself when he will repent of
his sins, or when the Holy Ghost will work, yet he shall repent
indeed; he shall do it, I say, when HE doth so work, not staying
till another can do so too. And since our own iniquity will then
make us best consider our own case, mourning apart, or every one
for their own iniquity, is most naturally proper thereto. And this
is the mourning that shall be in the house of David, Jerusalem,
the church, both with men and women, at all times when the Holy
Ghost shall help us to look upon him whom we have pierced. Pray
God give Mr. K. and myself more of these looks upon a crucified
Christ, for then we shall understand this and other such like
scriptures otherwise than to draw such incoherent inferences from
them as he doth.

Objection.

"Women were wont in gospel times to meet together to pray. Therefore
the women in gospel churches may separate themselves from their
brethren to perform divine worship by themselves without their
men" (Acts 16:13). This is another of his scriptures, brought to
uphold this fancy: But,

Answer

1. It is not said that the women of churches met together alone
to pray. But that Paul went down to a river-side where prayer was
wont to be made, and spake unto the women that resorted thither.
It looks therefore most agreeable to the word, to think that there
the law was read by the Jewish priests to the proselyted women
of that city, and that prayer, as was their custom in all such
service, was intermixed therewith. But this is but conjectural.
And yet, for all that, it is better grounded, and hath more reason
on its side, than hath any of this man's arguments for the opinion
of his women's meetings. But,

2. There was there at that time no gospel church of Christ, nor
before that any gospel ministry, consequently no church obedience.
Should it then be granted, that there were none but women at that
meeting, and that their custom was to meet at that river-side to
pray, it doth not therefore follow, that their practice was to be
a pattern, a rule, a law to women in churches, to separate from
their brethren, to perform divine worship, in their own woman's
congregation without their men.

3. There was there no gospel believer. Lydia herself, before Paul
came thither, had her heart shut up against the faith of Jesus
Christ; and how a company of strangers to gospel faith, should in
that their doing, be a pattern to the women in churches, a pattern
of Christian worship, I do not understand.

4. If Paul's call to Philippi had been by the vision of a woman,
or woman's meeting: what an argument would this man have drawn
from thence to have justified his women's meetings? But since
it was by a man, he hath lost an argument thereby. Though he,
notwithstanding, doth adventure to say, that God so approved of
that meeting, as then, and at that time, to take advantage to make
known his mind and will to them concerning Jesus Christ.

5. And now I am in, since Mr. K. will needs have this scripture
to justify such a practice, I wonder that he so lightly overlooked
Paul's going to that meeting, for thither he went to be sure (Acts
16:13-16). Yea how fairly, to his thinking, might he have pleaded,
that Paul by this act of his, was a great lover, countenancer and
commender of those he calls the women's meetings. Paul went to the
women's meeting at Philippi, therefore it is lawful for the women
of gospel churches to separate from their brethren, and to congregate
by themselves for the performance of some parts of divine worship.
I say how easily might he have said this, and then have popt in
those two verses above quoted, and so have killed the old one?
[11]For the word lies liable to be abused by the ignorance of
men, and it had been better than it is, if this had been the first
time that this man had served it so, for the justification of his
rigid principles; but when men, out of a fond conceit of their own
abilities, or of prejudice to them that contradict their errors,
are tempted to shew their folly, they will not want an opportunity
from false glosses put upon the text, to do it.

6. But Paul went to that company to preach Christ's gospel to
them, not for that they merited his coming, but of the grace of
God, as also did Peter and John, when at the hour of prayer they
went up into the temple, and Paul into the synagogue at Antioch
(Acts 3:1-3, 13:14-16). But as fairly might this man have urged,
that the healing of the lame man that lay at that time at the
gate of the temple, and the conversion of them by Paul at Antioch,
was by the procurement of the prayers of the sisters and by their
reading of the law in that synagogue at Antioch, as to argue as
he has done, that God was so well pleased, or so well approved
of that woman's meeting as he feigns it at Philippi, as to send,
&c. to them his minister.

7. But again, that this woman's meeting should be so deserving,
and that while they were without the faith of Christ, as to procure
a gospel minister to be sent unto them, that Christ might to them
be made known, and yet that so few of them should be converted
to the faith, seems a greater paradox to me. For we read not that
one of the women then, or of them of the town, that did use to go
to that meeting (for Lydia was of Thyatira), was ever converted
to Christ; brethren we read of several, but we hear not of any one
more of those women (v 40). But Lydia worshipped God, therefore
her practice might prevail. Although it is said she worshipped
God, yet she was but a proselyte, as those Acts 13 were, and
knew no more of Christ than the eunuch did (Acts 8). But hold,
she had faith, will that make all practice acceptable; yea, law
and commandment to others, and the work of those that have none,
meritorious? But we must touch upon these things anon.

Objection.

"But (saith Mr. K.) Malachi 3:16 doth countenance these meetings."

Answer.

Not at all; though Mr. K. has pleased to change a term in the text,
to make it speak his mind; for he has put out thought, and put in
call; but all will not do his work; for when he has done what he
can, it will be difficult to make that scripture say, It is the
duty of women in gospel churches to separate from their brethren,
to perform divine worship among themselves.


Objection.

"But Jude 20 doth justify these meetings, except," saith he, "any
will say, women are not to be built up in their most holy faith."

Answer.

How fain would the man lay hold on something, only he wants divine
help, that is, the word of God, to bottom his things upon. But
doth the apostle here at all treat of the women and their meetings,
or are they only the beloved; and to be built up, &c. speaks he
not there to the church, which consisteth of men and women? and
are not men the more noble part in all the churches of Christ?
But can women no other way be built up in their most holy faith,
but by meetings of their own without their men? But, Building up
YOURSELVES, I suppose is the thing he holds by. But cannot the
church, and every woman in it, build up themselves without their
woman's meetings? wherefore have they the word, their closet, and
the grace of meditation, but to build up themselves withal? He
saith not, "Build up one another," but if he had, it might well
have been done without a woman's meeting. But anything to save a
drowning man. This text then is written to the church of Christ,
by which it is exhorted to faith and prayer; but it speaks not a
word of a woman's meeting, and therefore it is fooling with the
word to suggest it. I cannot therefore, while I see this impertinent
dealing, but think our argumentator dotes, or takes upon him to
be a head of those he thinks to rule over. The woman's letter to
me also seems to import the same, when they say, "Mr. K. would
desire to know what objections you have against it (his arguments),
and he is ready to give his further advice."


Thus having taken from his arguments those holy words of God which
he has abused, to make them stand; I come next to the arguments
themselves, and intend to pick their bones for the crows.

1stly,

He saith, "That the same spirit that was in Miriam, is also in
all God's servants for the same end, both to pray for mercies we
stand in need of, and to praise God for mercies received."

Answer.

1. But the question is, whether Miriam did, as she led out the
women to dance, act only as an ordinary saint. And if you evade
this, you choose the tongue of the crafty, and use the words of
deceit; for she managed that work as she was "Miriam the prophetess";
and in your next, pray tell your women so.

2. But as Miriam the prophetess, she did not lead the women from
their men, to worship in some place remote by themselves, as we
have shewed before.

2dly, He saith, "That God hath promised to pour out his Spirit
in gospel times to that very end, that women might pray together
apart from men."

Answer.

1. Not mentioning again what was said before: I add, if by men,
he means the brethren, the prophet will not be his voucher, for he
neither saith nor intimates such a thing.

2. And how far short this saying is, of making of God and his holy
prophet, the author of schism in worship, and an encouragement
unto schism therein, it is best in time that he looks to it. For
if they may withdraw to do thus at one time, they may withdraw to
do thus at another. And if the Spirit is given to them to this very
end, that they may go by themselves from the church, to perform
this divine worship at one time, they may, for what bounds this
man has set them, go by themselves to do thus always. But, as I
said, the whole of this proposition being false, the error is still
the greater.

3dly,

"God," saith he, "hath so well approved of women meeting together
to pray in gospel times, as then, and at that time, to take occasion
to make known his mind and will to them concerning Jesus Christ"
(Acts 16:13).

Answer.

Let the reader consider what was said before, and now it follows;
if this assertion be true, then the popish doctrine of merit is
good, yea the worst sort of it, which is, works done before faith.
For that we read of none of these women save Lydia feared or
worshipped God; and yet saith he, God so approved of that meeting
as then, and at that time, to send them his gospel, which is one
of the richest blessings; nor will it help to lay Cornelius, now
in my way, for the deservings here were, for ought we read, of
women that feared not God. Here Lydia only bare that character;
it is said SHE worshipped God, but she was not all the women.
But Mr. K. saith thus of them all. I know also there was faith in
some in Messias to come, though when he came, they knew not his
person; but this is not the case neither; these women, who held
up as he feigned, this meeting, were not as we read of, of this
people.

4thly,

He said, "That Esther and her maids fasted and prayed, and the
Lord gave a gracious return, or answer and deliverance." That is,
to the church, that then was under the rage of Haman.

Answer.

Let the reader remember what was said before, and now I ask this
man,

1. Whether Mordecai and the good men then did not pray and fast
as well as she? And if so, Whether they might not obtain at least,
some little of the mercy, as well as those women? If so,

2. Whether Mr. K., in applying the deliverance of this people to
the prayer of the queen and her maids, for he lays it only there,
be not deceitfully arguing, and do not tend to puff up that sex,
to their hurt and damage! Yea whether it doth not tend to make
them unruly and headstrong? But if they be more gently inclined
to obedience, no thanks to Mr. K.

3. And if I should ask Mr. K. who gave him authority to attribute
thus the deliverance of this people, to who and what prayers he
please, I suppose it would not be easy for him to answer. The text
saith not that the prayers of these women procured the blessing.
But Mr. K. hath here a woman's meeting to vindicate, and therefore
it is that he is thus out in his mind. Prayers were heard and the
church was delivered. And I doubt not but that these good women
had hand and heart in the work. But should all be admitted that
Mr. K. hath said as to this also, yet this scripture, as hath
already been proved, will not justify his woman's meeting.

5thly,

"He makes his appeal to the women, if they have not obtained, by
their prayers in these their meetings, many blessed returns of
prayer from God, both to themselves and the church of God."

Answer.

I count this no whit better than the very worst of his paper, for
besides the silliness of his appeal, by which he makes these good
women to be judges in their own cause, his words have a direct
tendency in them to puff them up to their destruction. I have wondered
sometimes, to see when something extraordinary hath happened to
the church of God for good, that a few women meeting together to
pray, should be possessed with a conceit, that they fetched the
benefit down from heaven, when perhaps ten thousand men in the
land prayed for the mercy as hard as they. Yea I have observed,
that though the things bestowed, were not so much as thought of
by them, yet they have been apt to conclude that their meeting
together has done it. But poor women, you are to be pitied; your
tempter is to bear the blame, to wit, this man and his fellows.

I come now to some objections that may yet be thought on: and will
speak a word to them.

Objection.

It is said, "Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them" (matt 18:20).

Answer.

To gather together in Christ's name, is to gather together by his
authority; That is, by his law and commandment (Acts 4:17,18,30,
5:28,40; Col 3:17). But we have no law of Christ, nor commandment,
that the women of this or that church, should separate themselves
from their brethren, to maintain meetings among themselves, for the
performing of divine worship: and therefore such meetings cannot
be in his name; that is, by his authority, law, and commandment;
and so ought not to be at all.

Objection.

"But women may, if sent for by them of their own sex, come to see
them when they are sick, and when so come together, pray in that
assembly before they part."

Answer.

The law of Christ is, "Is any sick among you? let him [and the
woman is included in the man] call for the elders of the church;
and let them pray over him," &c. And to this injunction there is a
threefold promise made. (1.) "And the prayer of faith shall save
the sick." (2.) "And the Lord shall raise him up." (3.) "And if he
have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him" (John 5:14,15).
And considering, that this advice is seconded with so much grace:
I think it best in all such cases, as in all other, to make the
word of God our rule.

Objection.

"But women have sometimes cases, which modesty will not admit
should be made known to men, what must they do then?"

Answer.

Their husbands and they are one flesh, and are no more to be
accounted two. Let them tell their grief to them. Thus Rachel asked
children of her husband, and went not to a nest of women to make
her complaint to them (Gen 30:1). Or let them betake themselves to
their closets, with Rebecca (Gen 25:20-23). Or if they be in the
assembly of the saints, let them pray in their hearts, with Hannah.
And if their petition be lawful, I doubt not but they may be heard
(1 Sam 1:13).

Our author, perhaps, will say, I have not spoken to his question;
which was, "Whether women, fearing God, may meet to pray together?
And whether it be lawful for them so to do?"

But I answer, I have: with respect to all such godly women as are
in the churches of the saints (1 Cor 14:33-35 compared with vv
15-17). And when he has told us, that his question respected only
those out of churches, then will I confess that I did mistake him.
Yet he will get nothing thereby, forasmuch as his question, to be
sure, intends those in special. Also his arguments are for the
justifying of that their practice. Now the reason why I waved the
form of his question, was, because it was both scanty and lean of
words, as to the matter of the controversy in hand: also I thought
it best to make it more ample, and distinct, for the edification
of our reader. And if after all, Mr. K. is not pleased at what
I have done, let him take up the question, and answer it better.
The man perhaps may fly to the case of utter necessity, and so
bring forth another question, to wit, whether, if the men of a
church should all die, be murdered, or cast into prison: the women
of that church may not meet together to pray? And whether it be
not lawful for them so to do? But when he produceth a necessity
for the putting of such a question, and then shall put it to me;
I will, as God shall help me, give him an answer thereto.

But, may some say, Our women in this do not what they do of their
own heads, they are allowed to do what they do by the church.

I answer, No church allowance is a foundation sufficient to justify
that which is neither commanded nor allowed by the word. Besides,
who knows not, that have their eyes in their heads, what already
has, and what further may, come into the churches, at such a gap
as this. And now to give the reader a cautionary conclusion.

Caution 1.

Take heed of letting the name, or good show of a thing, beget in
thy heart a religious reverence of that thing; but look to the word
for thy bottom,[12] for it is the word that authorizeth, whatever
may be done with warrant in worship to God; without the word
things are of human invention, of what splendour or beauty soever
they may appear to be. Without doubt the Friars and Nuns, and
their religious orders, were of a good intent at first, as also
compulsive vows of chastity, single life, and the like. But they
were all without the word, and therefore, as their bottom wanted
divine authority, so the practice wanted sanctity by the Holy
Ghost. The word prayer is, of itself, in appearance so holy, that
he forthwith seems to be a devil that forbids it. And yet we find
that prayers have been out of joint, and disorderly used; and
therefore may by one, without incurring the danger of damnation,
be called into question; and if found without order by him, he may
labour to set them in joint again (Matt 6:5-8, 23:14; James 4:3).

I am not of the number of them that say, "What profit should we
have if we pray unto God?" (Job 21:15). But finding no good footing
in the word for that kind of service we have treated about above,
and knowing that error and human inventions in religion will not
offer themselves, but with wiped lips, and a countenance as demure
as may be, and also being persuaded that this opinion of Mr.
K. is vagrant, yea a mere alien as to the scriptures, I being an
officer, have apprehended it, and put it in the stocks, and there
will keep it, till I see by what authority it has leave to pass
and repass as it lists, among the godly in this land.

Caution 2.

Yet by all that I have said, I never meant to intimate in the least,
but that believing women are saints as well as men: and members
of the body of Christ. And I will add, that as they, and we,
are united to Christ, and made members of his mystical body, the
fulness of him that fills all in all, so there is no superiority,
as I know of, but we are all one in Christ. For, the man is not
without the woman, nor "the woman without the man, in the Lord,"
(1 Cor 11:11) nor are we counted "as male or female" in him (Gal
3:28; Eph 1:23). Only we must observe that this is spoken of that
church which is his true mystical body, and not of every particular
congregation of professing Christians. The churches of Christ here
and there are also called his body. But no church here, though
never so famous, must be taken for that of which mention was made
afore. [13]As Christ then has a body mystical, which is called
his members, his flesh, and his bones (Eph 5:30), so he has a body
politic, congregations modelled by the skill that his ministers have
in his word, for the bearing up of his name, and the preserving of
his glory in the world against Antichrist. In this church, order
and discipline, for the nourishing up of the true mystical body
of Christ, has been placed from the foundation of the world.
Wherefore in this, laws, and statutes, and government, is to be
looked after, and given heed unto, for the edification of that
which is to arrive at last to a perfect man: to the measure of
the stature of the fulness of Christ (1 Cor 12:27-30; Eph 4:11-13).

Now, where there is order and government by laws and statutes,
there must, of necessity, be also a distinction of sex, degrees,
and age. Yea, offices and officers must also be there, for our
furtherance and joy of faith. From which government and rule our
ordinary women are excluded by Paul; nor should it, since it is
done by the wisdom of God, be any offence unto them.

In this church there are ofttimes many hypocrites, and formal
professors, and heresies, "That they which are approved may be made
manifest" (1 Cor 11:19). These therefore being there, and being
suffered to act as they many times do, provoke the truly godly
to contend with them by the word; for that these hypocrites, and
formal professors, naturally incline to a denial of the power of
godliness, and to set up forms of their own in the stead thereof
(Mar 7:6-9; 2 Tim 3:5).

And this is done for the sake and for the good of those that are the
true members of the body of Christ, and that are to arrive at his
haven of rest: from whom those others at last shall be purged, and
with them, all their things that offend. "Then shall the righteous
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath
ears to hear let him hear" (Matt 13:43).

This church, that thus consisteth of all righteous, that are so in
God's account: they are to have a house in heaven, and to be for
God's habitation there. Who, then, shall be governed by their head
without those officers and laws that are necessary here. And both
at last shall be subject to him, that sometime did put all things
under Christ, that God may be all in all (John 14:1-3; Eph 2:21;
1 Cor 15:23-27). Wherefore, my beloved sisters, this inferiority
of yours will last but a little while. When the day of God's salvation
is come, to wit, when our Lord shall descend from heaven, with a
shout, with the voice of the archangel, and the trump of God, these
distinctions of sexes shall be laid aside, and every pot shall be
filled to the brim. For with a notwithstanding you shall be saved,
and be gathered up to that state of felicity if you continue in
faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety (1 Tim 2:15).

Caution 3.

I doubt not at all of the lawfulness of women's praying, and that,
both in private and public: only when they pray publicly, they
should not separate from, but join with the church in that work.
They should also not be the mouth of the assembly, but in heart,
desires, groans, and tears, they should go along with the men. In
their closets they are at liberty to speak unto their God, who can
bear with, and pity them with us; and pardon all our weakness for
the sake of Jesus Christ.

And here I will take an occasion to say, there may be a twofold
miscarriage in prayer, one in doctrine, the other in the frame
of the heart. All are too much subject to the last, women [more
easily] to the first. And for this cause it is, at least so I think,
that women are not permitted to teach, nor speak in assemblies, for
divine worship, but to be and to learn in silence (1 Cor 14:33-35,
15:33). For he that faileth as to the frame of his spirit, hurteth
only himself: but he that faileth in doctrine corrupteth them that
stand by. Let the women be alone with Rebecca in the closet; or,
if in company, let her, with Hannah, speak to herself and to God;
and not doubt, but if she be humble, and keep within compass, she
shall be a sharer with her brethren in the mercy.

Caution 4.

Nor are women, by what I have said, debarred from any work or
employ, unto which they are enjoined by the word. They have often
been called forth to be God's witnesses, and have borne famous
testimony for him against the sons of the sorceress and the
whore.[14] I remember many of them with comfort, even of these
eminent daughters of Sarah, whose daughters you also are, so long
as you do well, and are not afraid with any amazement (1 Peter
3:1-6). What by the word of God, you are called unto, what by the
word is enjoined you do; and the Lord be with you.

But this of the women's meetings; since, indeed, there is nothing
for its countenance in the word, and since the calling together
of assemblies for worship is an act of power, and belongeth to
the church, elders, or chief men of the same: let me intreat you
to be content, to be under subjection and obedience, as also saith
the law. We hold that it is God's word that we are to look to, as
to all things pertaining to worship, because it is the word that
authorizeth and sanctifieth what we do.

Caution 5.

WOMEN! They are an ornament in the church of God on earth, as the
ANGELS are in the church in heaven. Betwixt whom also there is
some comparison, for they cover their faces in acts of worship
(Isa 6:2; 1 Cor 11:10). But as the angels in heaven are not Christ,
and so not admitted to the mercy-seat to speak to God, so neither
are women on earth, [but] the man; who is to worship with open
face before him, and to be the mouth in prayer for the rest. As the
angels then cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, with faces covered in heaven:
So let the women, cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, with their faces covered
on earth: Yea, thus they should do, because of the angels. "For
this cause ought the woman to have power," that is a covering, "on
her head, because of the angels" (1 Cor 11:10). Not only because
the angels are present, but because women and angels, as to their
worship, in their respective places, have a semblance. For the
angels are inferior to the great man Christ, who is in heaven;
and the woman is inferior to the man, that truly worships God in
the church on earth.

Methinks, holy and beloved sisters, you should be content to wear
this power, or badge of your inferiority, since the cause thereof
arose at first from yourselves. It was the woman that at first
the serpent made use of, and by whom he then overthrew the world:
wherefore the women, to the world's end, must wear tokens of her
underlingship in all matters of worship. To say nothing of that
which she cannot shake off, to wit, her pains and sorrows in
child-bearing, which God has riveted to her nature, there is her
silence, and shame, and a covering for her face, in token of it,
which she ought to be exercised with, whenever the church comes
together to worship (Gen 3:16; 1 Tim 2:15; 1 Cor 11:13; 1 Tim 2:9).

Do you think that God gave the woman her hair, that she might deck
herself, and set off her fleshly beauty therewith? It was given
her to cover her face with, in token of shame and silence, for that
by the woman sin came into the world (1 Tim 2:9). And perhaps the
reason why the angels cover their faces when they cry, Holy, Holy,
Holy, in heaven, is to shew that they still bear in mind, with a
kind of abhorrence, the remembrance of their fellows falling from
thence. Modesty, and shame-facedness, becomes women at all times,
especially in times of public worship, and the more of this is
mixed with their grace and personage, the more beautiful they are
both to God and men. But why must the women have shame-facedness,
since they live honestly as the men? I answer, In remembrance of
the fall of Eve, and to that the apostle applies it. For a woman,
necessity has no law, to shave her head, and to look with open
face in worship, as if she could be a leader there, is so far from
doing that which becomes her, that it declares her to have forgot
what God would have her for ever with shame remember.

Caution 6.

In what I have said about the women's meetings, I have not at all
concerned myself about those women, that have been extraordinary
ones, such as Miriam, Deborah, Huldah, Anna, or the rest, as the
daughters of Philip the evangelist, Priscilla, the women that
Paul said laboured with him in the gospel, or such like; for they
might teach, prophecy, and had power to call the people together
so to do. Though this I must say concerning them, they ought to,
and did, notwithstanding so high a calling, still bear about with
them the badge of their inferiority to them that were prophets
indeed. And hence it is said, under pain of being guilty of disorder,
that if they prayed in the church, or prophesied there, with their
head uncovered, they then dishonoured their head (1 Cor 11:5).

The prophetesses were below the prophets, and their covering for
their heads was to be worn in token thereof, and perhaps it was
for want of regard to this order, that when Miriam began to perk it
[15] before Moses, that God covered her face with a leprous-scab
(Num 12:10). Hence these women, when prophets were present, did
use to lie still as to acts of power, and leave that to be put
forth by them that were higher than they. And even Miriam herself,
though she was one indeed, yet she came always behind, not only in
name but worship, unless when she was in her own disorders (Num
12:1).

And it is worth your farther noting, that when God tells Israel
that they should take heed in the plague of leprosy, that they
diligently observed to do what the priest and Levites taught them,
that he conjoins with that exhortation, that they should "remember
what God did unto Miriam by the way" (Deut 24:8,9). Intimating surely
that they should not give heed to women, that would be perking
up in matters of worshipping God. Much less should we invest them
with power to call congregations of their own, there to perform
worship without their men.

Yet, will I say, notwithstanding all this, that if any of these high
women had, but we never read that they did, separate themselves, and
others of their own sex with them, apart to worship by themselves:
or if they had given out commandment so to do, and had joined God's
name to that commandment, I should have freely consented that our
women should do so too, when led out, and conducted in worship,
by so extraordinary a one. Yea more, If any of these high women
had given it out for law, that the women of the churches in New
Testament times, ought to separate themselves from their men, and
as so separate, perform divine worship among themselves: I should
have subscribed thereto. But finding nothing like this in the
word of God, for the sanctifying of such a practice: and seeing
so many scriptures wrested out of their place to justify so fond
a conceit: and all this done by a man of conceit, and of one that,
as his sisters say, expects my answer: I found myself engaged to
say something for the suppressing of this his opinion.

But to return to the good women in the churches, and to make up
my discourse with them.

First, These meetings of yours, honourable women, wherein you
attempt to perform divine worship by yourselves, without your
men, not having the authority of the word to sanctify them, will
be found will-worship, in the day when you, as to that, shall
be measured with that golden reed, the law of God. And "who hath
required this at your hand?" may put you to your shifts for an
answer, notwithstanding all Mr. K. has said to uphold you (Isa
1:12; Rev 11:1).

Secondly, These meetings of yours need not be; there are elders
or brethren in all churches, to call to, and manage this worship
of God, in the world: if you abide in your subjection and worship
as you are commanded.

Thirdly, These meetings of yours, instead of being an ornament
to the church in which you are, are a shame and blemish to those
churches. For they manifest the unruliness of such women, or that
the church wants skill to govern them (1 Cor 14:23). Have you not
"in your flock a male?" (Mal 1:14).

Fourthly, Suppose your meetings in some cases were lawful, yet
since by the brethren they may be managed better, you and your
meetings ought to give place. That the church together, and the
brethren, as the mouth to God, are capable of managing this solemn
worship best: consider--1. The gifts for all such service are most
to be found in the elders and leading men in the church: and not
in the women thereof. 2. The spirit for conduct and government in
that worship, is not in the women, but in the men. 3. The men are
admitted in such worship, to stand with open face before God, a
token of much admittance to liberty and boldness with God, a thing
denied to the women (1 Cor 11:4,5). 4. For that when meetings
for prayers are commanded, the men, to be the mouth to God, are
mentioned, but not in ordinary women, in all the Scriptures. Where
the women and children, and them that suck the breasts are called,
with the bride and bridegroom, and the whole land, to mourn: yet
the ministers, and elders, and chiefest of the brethren, are they,
and they only, that are bid to say, "Spare thy people, O Lord! and
give not thine heritage to reproach" (Joel 1:13,14, 2:15-17). 5.
The word for encouragement to pray believingly in assemblies is
given to men. And it is the word that makes, and that sanctifies
an ordinance of God: men, therefore, in all assemblies for worship,
should be they that should manage it, and let others join in their
places.

Objection.

But the women is included in the man, for the same word signifies
both.

Answer.

1. If the woman is included here, let her not exclude the man. But
the man is [by them] excluded: The man is excluded by this woman's
meeting from worship; from worship, though he be the head in
worship over the women, and by God's ordinance appointed to manage
it, and this is an excluding of the worst complexion (1 Cor 11:3).

2. Though the woman is included, when the man sometimes is named,
yet the man is not excluded, when himself as chief is named. But
to cut him off from being the chief in all assemblies for worship,
is to exclude him, and that when he for that in chief is named.

3. The woman is included when the man is named, yet but in her
place, and if she worships in assemblies, her part is to hold her
tongue, to learn in silence; and if she speaks, she must do it, I
mean as to worship, in her heart to God.

4. Nor, do I think, that any woman that is holy and humble, will
take offence at what I have said; for I have not in anything sought
to degrade them, or to take from them what either nature or grace,
or an appointment of God hath invested them with: but have laboured
to keep them in their place. And doubtless to abide where God has
put us, is that which not only highly concerns us, but that, which
becomes us best. Sisters, I have said what I have said to set you
right, and to prevent your attempting to do things in such sort
unto which you are not appointed. Remember what God did to Miriam,
and be afraid.


Be as often in your closets as you will; the oftener there the
better. This is your duty, this is your privilege: this place is
sanctified to you for service by the holy Word of God. Here you
may be, and not make ordinances interfere, and not presume upon
the power of your superiors, and not thrust out your brethren, nor
put them behind your backs in worship.

Be also as often as possibly you can, in worship, when the church,
or parts thereof, are assembled for that end, according to God's
appointment. And when you are there, join with heart and soul with
your brethren in all holy petitions to God. Let the men in prayer
be the mouth to God, and the women list after with groans and
desires. Let the men stand with open face in this worship, for that
they are the image and glory of God, and let the women be clothed
in modest apparel, with shame-facedness, in token of the remembrance
of what has been touched afore.

When women keep their places, and men manage their worshipping of
God as they should, we shall have better days for the church of
God, in the world (Jer 29:10-14). Women are not to be blamed for
that they are forward to pray to God, only let them know their
bounds; and I wish that idleness in men be not the cause of their
putting their good women upon this work. Surely they that can
scarce tie their shoes, and their garters, before they arrive
at the tavern, or get to the coffee-house door in a morning, can
scarce spare time to be a while in their closets with God. Morning
closet-prayers are now, by most London professors, thrown away;
and what kind of ones they make at night, God doth know, and their
conscience, when awake, will know; however I have cause, as to
this, to look at home: And God mend me and all his servants about
it, and wherein we else are out.

I have done, after I have said, that there are some other things,
concerning women, touching which, when I have an opportunity, I may
also give my judgment. But at present, I intreat that these lines
be taken in good part, for I seek edification, not contention.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] "Breach Repaired," a defence of singing in public worship, then
newly and partially introduced. 1700, p. 2.

[2] Distinguishing Practices of Friends, p. 280-1.

[3] P. 495.

[4] P. 509.

[5] Sketch of Friends' Discipline, p. 35.

[6] Probably a female branch of the family of John or Samuel Fenn,
hatters at Bedford, who, in 1670, were cruelly persecuted for
suffering a meeting for religious worship to take place in the
house of John Fenn. Not only all their stock of hats, materials,
and tools, but the whole of their household furniture was seized
and carried off to satisfy ruinous fines. One John Bardolf was
also cruelly persecuted for Christ's sake at the same time.--Vide
Narrative of Arbitrary Proceedings at Bedford, 4to, 1670, in the
editor's possession.

[7] In times of such severe trial and suffering to our pilgrim
forefathers, they knew the value of prayer; and at the risk of
property, liberty, and even life, held frequent meetings to implore
their God and Father to mitigate their sufferings, and to have
mercy upon their cruel persecutors. Not only working tools and
stock, but commonly all the furniture, was taken from the Christians,
while their ministers and members, both men and women, were
imprisoned in miserable jails. One of these, Mr. Robert Kalder,
dying, was buried in the churchyard; but those furious bigots
dug up his naked body, and dragged it to the gates of his former
residence, leaving it there, a frightful spectacle to his widow
and family. They had meetings for prayer; and how does it become
their descendants in the faith to have days of thanksgiving and
nights of praise?--See Broadmead Records and Crosby's History of
Baptists, vol. ii., p. 240.--Ed.

[8] "Syllogism," a form of reasoning, consisting of three propositions,
having this property; that the conclusion necessarily follows from
the two premises: so that if the first and second be granted, the
conclusion must be granted in like manner. No wonder that Bunyan
neither understood nor was awed by this hard word. Armed with holy
Writ, he goes to work "to pick the bones of the syllogism."--Ed.

[9] Much stress was, and is now, laid in many churches upon the
necessity of all persons, before praying or preaching in public,
being guided by the opinion of the church. The taking advice in
so important a step must be proper; but any pledge to abide by
it, contrary to the conscientious conviction of the individual,
would be a violation of the duty of private judgment. If in their
ministrations they were false or foolish, the church must exercise
discipline; but if they became useful, surely no objection could
be urged as to the validity of their call to the ministry, because
the church had not been first consulted or had advised them not to
proceed. The desire--the ability, by sound views of divine truth,
and a happy way of illustrating and enforcing them--with the
opportunity of so doing, is the divine call to this holy work.--Ed.

[10] "So nunnish," a singular mode of expression, alluding to the
nuns being separated from the world, and shut up by themselves.
They were not permitted to exercise the priestly office. Father
confessors and chaplains were appointed for these duties.--Ed.

[11] To have said that the spirit of divination, which was cast out,
was so far killed by virtue of a female prayer meeting, would have
been as true as to have said, that these meetings were limited to
females only.--Ed.

[12] "Bottom," or foundation.

[13] A dangerous error, originating in the sectarian pride of
Antichrist, prevails to a very great extent. It is that some one
visible church, or set of united churches, is the mystical body
of Christ, and entitled to be called THECHURCHEvery congregation
of pious men and women, united together in the faith, is a church
of Christ. But THE church comprises all the saints of God who ever
lived--live now, or will live on the earth; until their number is
completed, and this creation shall give place to the new heavens
and the new earth. Every church is as distinct as it is equal; whether
it meet at Corinth, Rome, or Ephesus, at London or Edinburgh. Be
it Episcopalian, Independent, Presbyterian, Baptist, or a church
of the Society of Friends; each is entitled, according to the New
Testament, to equal honour and privilege.--Ed.

[14] The usual appellations of Popery.--Ed.

[15] "To perk it," to hold up her head with affected superiority
or spiritual pride.--Ed.

***

INSTRUCTION FOR THE IGNORANT:

BEING A SALVE TO CURE THAT GREAT WANT OF KNOWLEDGE, WHICH SO MUCH
REIGNS BOTH IN YOUNG AND OLD.

PREPARED AND PRESENTED TO THEM IN A PLAIN AND EASY DIALOGUE, FITTED
TO THE CAPACITY OF THE WEAKEST.

'My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.'--Hosea 4:6


ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

This little catechism is upon a plan perfectly new and unique.
It was first published as a pocket volume in 1675, and has been
republished in every collection of the author's works; and recently
in a separate tract. The earliest edition that has been discovered
bears the date of 1691; from which our copy has been prepared for
the press. This is the first book of this class that was composed
upon the broad basis of Christianity, perfectly free from sectarian
bias or peculiarity. It is an exhibition of scriptural truths,
before which error falls without the trouble of pulling it down.
It is in the world, like the ark of God in the temple of Dagon. It
is alike admirably calculated to convey the most important truths
to the inmates of a palace or of a workhouse,--to the young or
to the aged,--to the ignorant Roman Catholic, or to the equally
ignorant Protestant. Its broad catholicity is its distinguishing
excellence. In the separate communions included within the general
church of Christ are various, and in many respects, inestimable
compendiums of Christian truth, arranged for the catechetical
instruction of the young and ignorant; but it cannot be denied
that these, one and all, exhibit some marks of sectarian feeling
and dogmatic teaching in the details that relate to the special
views which each communion takes of certain scriptural doctrines.
The reason why this should be the case is very obvious: there
would be no differences of opinion amongst Christians except
from conviction that these differences are essential, and such
conviction naturally leads to these points of disagreement being
(may we not say?) rather too obtrusively enforced as part and
portion of a saving belief. All Bunyan's efforts were to awaken
sinners to a sense of their degradation, misery, and danger, and
to direct them to the only refuge from the wrath to come--the hope
set before them in the gospel; and then leaving the pious convert
to the guidance of his Bible in forming his connections in the
pilgrimage of life. Bunyan is solemnly in earnest; his desire is,
that poor sinners should be relieved from ignorance, darkness,
and destruction, and be introduced into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. May his impressive injunction be indelibly fixed
upon our souls, 'To read, ponder over, and receive the wholesome
medicine as we shall answer in the day of the terrible judgment.'--GEO.
OFFOR.

TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN AND ABOUT BEDFORD, WALKING IN THE
FAITH AND FELLOWSHIP OF THE GOSPEL, YOUR AFFECTIONATE BROTHER AND
COMPANION IN THE KINGDOM AND PATIENCE OF JESUS CHRIST, WISHETH
ALL GRACE AND MERCY BY JESUS CHRIST. AMEN.

Holy and beloved,

Although I have designed this little treatise for public and common
benefit, yet considering that I am to you a debtor not only in
common charity; but by reason of special bonds which the Lord hath
laid upon me to you-ward, I could do no less, being driven from
you in presence, not affection, but first present you with this
little book; not for that you are wanting in the things contained
herein, but to put you again in remembrance of first things, and
to give you occasion to present something to your carnal relations,
that may be, if God will, for their awakening and conversion:
accept it therefore as a token of my christian remembrance of you.

Next I present it to all those unconverted, old and young, who
have been at any time under my preaching, and yet remain in their
sins:[1] and I entreat them also that they receive it as a token
of my love to their immortal souls; yea, I charge them as they
will answer it in the day of terrible judgment, that they read,
ponder over, and receive this wholesome medicine prepared for
them. Now the God of blessing bless it to the awakening of many
sinners, and the salvation of their souls by faith in Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Yours, to serve you by my ministry, when I can,[2] to your edification
and consolation,

JOHN BUNYAN.




INSTRUCTION FOR THE IGNORANT

Quest. How many gods are there?--Answ. To the Christians there is
but one God, the Father of whom are all things, and we of him (1
Cor 8:6).

Q. Why is not the God of the Christians the God of them that are
no Christians?--A. He is their maker and preserver; but they have
not chosen him to be their God (Acts 17:24; Psa 36:6; Ju 10:14).

Q. Are there then other gods besides the God of the Christians?--A.
There is none other true God but HE; but because they want the
grace of Christians, therefore they choose not him, but such gods
as will suit with and countenance their lusts (John 8:44).

Q. What gods are they that countenance the lusts of wicked men?--A.
The devil, who is the god of this world; the belly, that god of
gluttons, drunkards, and riotous persons; and idle pleasures and
vanities, which are, for the most part, the gods of the youth
(Job 8:4; 2 Cor 4:4; Phil 3:19; Exo 32:6; 1 Cor 10:7; 2 Tim 2:2;
1 John 5:21).

Q. Who is a Christian?--A. One that is born again, a new creature;
one that sits at Jesus' feet to hear his word; one that hath his
heart purified and sanctified by faith,[3] which is in Christ
(John 3:3,5,7; Acts 11:24, 15:9, 26:18; 2 Cor 5:17).

Q. How do you distinguish the God of the Christians from the gods
of other people?--A. He is a Spirit (John 4:24).

Q. Is there no other spirit but the true God?--A. Yes, there are
many spirits (1 John 4:1).

Q. What spirits are they?--A. The good angels are spirits; the bad
angels are spirits; and the souls of men are spirits (Heb 1:7,14;
1 Kings 22:21,22; Rev 16:13,14; Acts 7:59; Heb 12:23).

Q. How then is the true God distinguished from other spirits?--A.
Thus: No Spirit is eternal but HE, no Spirit is almighty but HE,
no Spirit is incomprehensible and unsearchable but HE: HE is also
most merciful, most just, most holy (Deut 33:27; Gen 17:1; Psa
145:3; Micah 7:18; Job 34:17; 1 Sam 2:2).

Q. Is this God, being a Spirit, to be known?--A. Yes, and that by
his works of creation, by his providences, by the judgments that
he executeth, and by his word.

Q. Do you understand him by the works of creation?--A. 'The heavens
declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handy work'
(Psa 19:1). 'For the invisible things of him from the creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal power and Godhead' (Rom 1:20).

Q. Do his works of providence also declare him?--A. They must
needs do it, since through his providence the whole creation is
kept in such harmony as it is, and that in despite of sin and
devils; also, if you consider that from an angel to a sparrow,
nothing falls to the ground without the providence of our heavenly
Father (Matt 10:29).

Q. Is he known by his judgments?--A. 'The Lord is known by the
judgments which he executeth; the wicked is snared in the work of
his own hands' (Psa 9:16).

Q. Is he known by his word?--A. Yes, most clearly: for by that he
revealeth his attributes, his decrees, his promises, his way of
worship, and how he is to be pleased by us.

Q. Of what did God make the world?--A. 'Things which are seen were
not made of things which do appear' (Heb 11:3).

Q. How long was he in making the world?--A. 'In six days the Lord
made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is' (Exo
20:11). 'And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had
made' (Gen 2:2).

Q. Of what did God make man?--A. 'The LORD God formed man of the
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life; and man became a living soul' (Gen 2:7).

Q. Why doth it say, God breathed into him the breath of life; is
man's soul of the very nature of the Godhead?--A. This doth not
teach that the soul is of the nature of the Godhead, but sheweth
that it is not of the same matter as his body, which is dust (Gen
18:27).

Q. Is not the soul then of the nature of the Godhead?--A. No, for
God cannot sin, but the soul doth; God cannot be destroyed in
hell, but the souls of the impenitent shall (Eze 18:4; Matt 10:28).

Q. How did God make man in the day of his first creation?--A. God
made man upright (Eccl 7:29). 'In the image of God created he him'
(Gen 1:27).

Q. Did God, when he made man, leave him without a rule to walk
by?--A. No: he gave him a law in his nature, and imposed upon him
a positive precept, but he offered violence to them, and brake
them both (Gen 3:3,6).

Q. What was the due desert of that transgression?--A. Spiritual death
in the day he did it, temporal death afterwards, and everlasting
death last of all (Gen 2:17, 3:19; Matt 25:46).

Q. What is it to be spiritually dead?--A. To be alienate from God,
and to live without him in the world, through the ignorance that
is in man, and through the power of their sins (Eph 4:18,19).

Q. Wherein doth this alienation from God appear?--A. In the love
they have to their sins, in their being loth to come to him, in
their pleading idle excuses for their sins, and in their ignorance
of the excellent mysteries of his blessed gospel (Eph 2:2,3,11,12,
4:18,19; Rom 1:28).

Q. What is temporal death?--A. To have body and soul separated
asunder, the body returning to the dust as it was, and the spirit
to God that gave it (Gen 3:19; Eccl 12:7).

Q. What is everlasting death?--A. For body and soul to be separate
for ever from God, and to be cast into hell fire (Luke 13:27; Mark
9:43).

Q. Do men go body and soul to hell so soon as they die?--A. The
body abideth in the grave till the sound of the last trump; but
the soul, if the man dies wicked, goes presently from the face of
God into hell, as into a prison, there to be kept till the day of
judgment (1 Cor 15:52; Isa 24:22; Luke 12:20).

Q. Do we come into the world as upright as did our first parent?--A.
No: he came into the world sinless, being made so of God Almighty,
but we came into the world sinners, being made so by his pollution.[4]

Q. How doth it appear that we came into the world polluted?--A.
We are the fruit of an unclean thing, are defiled in our very
conception, and are by nature the children of wrath (Job 14:4;
Psa 51:5; Eph 2:3).

Q. Can you make further proof of this?--A. Yes, it is said, That
by one man came sin, death, judgment, and condemnation upon all
men (Rom 5:12-19).

Q. Do we then come sinners into the world?--A. Yes, we are
transgressors from the womb, and go astray as soon as we are born,
speaking lies (Isa 48:8; Psa 58:3).

Q. But as Adam fell with us in him, so did he not by faith rise
with us in him? for he had no seed until he had the promise.--A. He
fell as a public person,[5] but believed the promise as a single
person. Adam's faith saved not the world, though Adam's sin
overthrew it.

Q. But do not some hold that we are sinners only by imitation?--A.
Yes, being themselves deceived. But God's word saith, we are
children of wrath by nature, that is, by birth and generation.

Q. Can you bring further proof of this?--A. Yes: in that day that
we were born, we were polluted in our own blood, and cast out to
the loathing of our persons. Again, the children of old that were
dedicated unto the Lord, a sacrifice was offered for them at a
month old, which was before they were sinners by imitation (Eze
16:4-9; Num 18:14-16).

Q. Can you make this appear by experience?--A. Yes: the first
things that bloom and put forth themselves in children, shew their
ignorance of God, their disobedience to parents, and their innate
enmity to holiness of life; their inclinations naturally run
to vanity. Besides little children die, but that they could not,
were they not of God counted sinners; for death is the wages of
sin (Rom 6:23).

Q. What is sin?--A. It is a transgression of the law (1 John 3:4).

Q. A transgression of what law?--A. Of the law of our nature, and
of the law of the ten commandments as written in the holy scriptures
(Rom 2:12-15; Exo 20).

Q. When doth one sin against the law of nature?--A. When you do
anything that your conscience tells you is a transgression against
God or man (Rom 2:14,15).

Q. When do we sin against the law as written in the ten commandments?--A.
When you do anything that they forbid, although you be ignorant
of it (Psa 19:12).

Q. How many ways are there to sin against this law?--A. Three: by
sinful thoughts, by sinful words, and also by sinful actions (Rom
7:7, 2:6; Matt 5:28, 12:37).

Q. What if we sin but against one of the ten commandments?--A.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point,
he is guilty of all; 'For he that said, Do not commit adultery,
said also, Do not kill. Now, if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou
kill, thou art become a transgressor of the law' (James 2:10,11).

Q. Where will God punish sinners for their sins?--A. Both in this
word and in that which is to come (Gen 3:24, 4:10-12; Job 21:30).

Q. How are men punished in this world for sin?--A. Many ways, as
with sickness, losses, crosses, disappointments and the like:
sometimes also God giveth them up to their own heart's lusts, to
blindness of mind also, and hardness of heart; yea, and sometimes
to strong delusions that they might believe lies, and be damned
(Lev 26:15,26; Amos 4:7,10; Rom 1:24,28; Exo 4:21, 9:12-14; Zeph
1:17; Rom 11:7,8; 2 Thess 2:11,12).

Q. How are sinners punished in the world to come?--A. With a worm
that never dies, and with a fire that never shall be quenched
(Mark 9:44).

Q. Whither do sinners go to receive this punishment?--A. 'The
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget
God' (Psa 9:17).

Q. What is hell?--A. It is a place and a state most fearful (Luke
13:28, 16:28; Acts 1:25).

Q. Why do you call it a place?--A. Because in hell shall all the
damned be confined as in a prison, in their chains of darkness
for ever (Luke 12:5,58, 16:26; Jude 6).

Q. What [kind of] place is hell?--A. It is a dark bottomless
burning lake of fire, large enough to hold all that perish (Matt
22:13; Rev 20:1,15; Isa 30:35; Prov 27:20).

Q. What do you mean when you say it is a fearful state?--A. I
mean, that it is the lot of those that are cast in thither to be
tormented in most fearful manner, to wit, with wrath and fiery
indignation (Rom 2:9; Heb 10:26,27).

Q. In what parts shall they be thus fearfully tormented?--A. In
body and soul: for hell-fire shall kindle upon both beyond what
now can be thought (Matt 10:28; Luke 16:24; James 5:3).[6]

Q. How long shall they be in this condition?--A. 'These shall go
away into everlasting punishment' (Matt 25:46). 'And the smoke
of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever, and they have no
rest day nor night' (Rev 14:11). For they 'shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power' (2 Thess 1:9).

Q. But why might not the ungodly be punished with this punishment
in this world, that we might have seen it and believe?--A. If the
ungodly should with punishment have been rewarded in this world,
it would in all probability have overthrown the whole order that
God hath settled here among men. For who could have endured here
to have seen the flames of fire, to have heard the groans, and to
have seen the tears, perhaps, of damned relations, as parents or
children? Therefore as Tophet of old was without the city, and as
the gallows and gibbets are built without the towns;[7] so Christ
hath ordered that they who are to be punished with this kind of
torment, shall be taken away: 'Take him away,' saith he (out of
this world) 'and cast him into outer darkness,' and let him have
his punishment there 'there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth' (Matt 22:13). Besides, faith is not to be wrought by looking
into hell, and seeing the damned tormented before our eyes, but
by 'hearing the word of God' (Rom 10:17). For he that shall not
believe Moses and the prophets, will not be persuaded should one
come from the dead, yea should one come to them in flames to
persuade them (Luke 16:27-31).

Q. Are there degrees of torments in hell?--A. Yes, for God will
reward every one according to their works. 'Wo unto the wicked,
it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be
given him' (Isa 3:11).

Q. Who are like to be most punished there, men or children?--A.
The punishment in hell comes not upon sinners according to age,
but sin; so that whether they be men or children, the greater sin,
the greater punishment; 'For there is no respect of persons with
God' (Rom 2:11).[8]

Q. How do you distinguish between great sins and little ones?--A.
By their nature, and by the circumstances that attend them.

Q. What do you mean by their nature?--A. I mean when they are very
gross in themselves (2 Chron 33:2; Eze 16:42).

Q. What kind of sins are the greatest?--A. Adultery, fornication,
murder, theft, swearing, lying, covetousness, witchcraft, sedition,
heresies, or any the like (1 Cor 6:9,10; Eph 5:3-6; Col 3:5,6;
Gal 5:19-21; Rev 21:8).

Q. What do you mean by circumstances that attend sin?--A. I mean
light, knowledge, the preaching of the Word, godly acquaintance,
timely caution, &c.

Q. Will these make an alteration in the sin?--A. These things
attending sinners, will make little sins great, yea greater than
greater sins that are committed in grossest ignorance.

Q. How do you prove that?--A. Sodom and Gomorrah wallowed in all
or most of those gross transgressions above mentioned: yea, they
were said to be sinners exceedingly, they lived in such sins as
may not be spoken of without blushing, and yet God swears that
Israel, his church, had done worse than they (Eze 16:48), and the
Lord Jesus also seconds it in that threatening of his, 'I say unto
you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the
day of judgment than for thee' (Matt 11:24; Luke 10:12).

Q. And was this the reason, namely, because they had such circumstances
attending them as Sodom had not?--A. Yes, as will plainly appear,
if you read the three chapters above mentioned.

Q. When do I sin against light and knowledge?--A. When you sin
against convictions of conscience, when you sin against a known law
of God, when you sin against counsels, and dissuasion of friends,
then you sin against light and knowledge (Rom 1:32).

Q. When do I sin against preaching of the word?--A. When you refuse
to hear God's ministers, or hearing them, refuse to follow their
wholesome doctrine (2 Chron 36:16; Jer 25:4-7, 35:15).

Q. When else do I sin against preaching of the Word?--A. When you
mock, or despise, or reproach the ministers; also when you raise
lies and scandals of them, or receive such lies or scandals
raised;[9] you then also sin against the preaching of the Word,
when you persecute them that preach it, or are secretly glad to
see them so used (2 Chron 30:1,10; Rom 3:8; Jer 20:10; 1 Thess
2:15,16).

Q. How will godly acquaintance greaten my sin?--A. When you sin
against their counsels, warnings, or persuasions to the contrary;
also when their lives and conversations are a reproof to you, and
yet against all you will sin. Thus sinned Ishmael, Esau, Eli's
sons, Absalom and Judas, they had good company, good counsels, and
a good life set before them by their godly acquaintance, but they
sinned against all, and their judgment was the greater. Ishmael
was cast away (Gen 21:10), Esau hated (Gal 4:30), Eli's sons died
suddenly (Mal 1:2; 1 Sam 2:25,34, 4:11), Absalom and Judas were
both strangely hanged (2 Sam 18; Matt 27).

Q. Are sins thus heightened, distinguished from others by any
special name?--A. Yes; they are called rebellion, and are compared
to the sin of witchcraft (1 Sam 15:23), they are called willful
sins (Heb 10:26), they are called briars and thorns, and they
that bring them forth are 'nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burned' (6:7,8).

Q. Are there any other things that can make little sins great
ones?--A. Yes; as when you sin against the judgments of God.
As for example, you see the judgments of God come upon some for
their transgressions, and you go on in their iniquities; as also
when you sin against the patience, long-suffering, and forbearance
of God, this will make little sins great ones (Dan 5:21-24; Rom
2:4,5).

Q. Did ever God punish little children for sin against him?--A.
Yes; when the flood came, he drowned all the little children that
were in the old world: he also burned up all the little children
which were in Sodom; and because upon a time the little children
at Bethel mocked the prophet as he was a going to worship God,
God let loose two she-bears upon them, which tore forty and two
of them to pieces (2 Kings 2:23,24).

Q. Alas! what shall we little children do?[10]--A. Either go on
in your sins, or remember now your Creator in the days of your
youth, before the evil days come (Eccl 12:1).

Q. Why do you mock us, to bid us go on in our sins? you had need
pray for us that God would save us.--A. I do not mock you, but
as the wise man doth; and besides, I pray for you and wish your
salvation.

Q. How doth the wise man mock us?--A. Thus; 'Rejoice, O young
man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee into judgment' (Eccl 11:9).

Q. What a kind of mocking is this?--A. Such an one as is mixed with
the greatest seriousness; as if he should say, Ay, do, sinners,
go on in your sins if you dare; do, live in your vanities, but
God will have a time to judge you for them.

Q. Is not this just as when my father bids me be naught if I will:
but if I be naught he will beat me for it?--A. Yes; or like that
saying of Joshua, 'If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord,
choose you this day whom ye will serve'; serve your sins at your
peril (Josh 24:15).

Q. Is it not best then for me to serve God?--A. Yes; for they that
serve the devil must be where he is, and they that serve God and
Christ, must be where they are (John 12:26; Matt 25:41).

Q. But when had I best begin to serve God?--A. Just now: 'Remember
NOW thy Creator,' NOW thou hast the gospel before thee, NOW thy
heart is tender and will be soonest broken.

Q. But if I follow my play and sports a little longer, may I not
come time enough?--A. I cannot promise thee that, for there be
little graves in the churchyard; and who can tell but that thy
young life is short; or if thou dost live, perhaps thy day of grace
may be as short as was Ishmael's of old: read also Proverbs 1:24-26.

Q. But if I stay a little longer before I turn, I may have more
wit to serve God than now I have, may I not?--A. If thou stayest
longer, thou wilt have more sin, and perhaps less wit: for the
bigger sinner, the bigger fool (Prov 1:22).

Q. If I serve God sometimes, and my sin sometimes, how then?--A.
'No man can serve two masters.' Thou canst not serve God and thy
sins (Matt 6:24). God saith, 'My Son, give me thine heart' (Prov
23:26). Also thy soul and body are his; but the double-minded man
is forbidden to think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord
(1 Cor 6:20; James 1:7,8).

Q. Do you find many such little children as I am, serve God?--A.
Not many; yet some I do, Samuel served him being a child (1 Sam
3:1). When Josiah was young he began to seek after the God of his
father David (2 Chron 34:3). And how kindly did our Lord Jesus
take it, to see the little children run tripping before him, and
crying, Hosannah to the Son of David? (Matt 21:15,16).

Q. Then I am not like to have many companions if I thus young
begin to serve God, am I?--A. 'Strait is the gate, and narrow is
the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it'
(Matt 7:14). Yet some companions thou wilt have. David counted
himself a companion of all them that love God's testimonies (Psa
119:63). All the godly, though grey-headed, will be thy companions;
yea, and thou shalt have either one or more of the angels of God
in heaven to attend on, and minister for thee (Matt 18:10).

Q. But I am like to be slighted, and despised by other little children,
if I begin already to serve God, am I not?--A. If children be so
rude as to mock the prophets and ministers of God, no marvel if
they also mock thee; but it is a poor heaven that is not worth
enduring worse things than to be mocked for the seeking and
obtaining of (2 Kings 2:23,24).

Q. But how should I serve God? I do not know how to worship him.--A.
The true worshippers, worship God in spirit and truth (John 4:24;
Phil 3:3).

Q. What is meant by worshipping him in the spirit?--A. To worship
him in God's Spirit and in mine own; that is, to worship him,
being wrought over in my very heart by the good Spirit of God, to
an hearty compliance with his will (Rom 1:9, 6:17; Psa 101:1-3).

Q. What is it to worship him in truth?--A. To do all that we do
in his worship according to his word, for his word is truth, and
to do it without dissimulation (Heb 8:5; John 17:17; Psa 26:6,
108:19,20). You may take the whole thus, Then do you worship God
aright, when in heart and life you walk according to his word.

Q. How must I do to worship him with my spirit and heart?--A. Thou
must first get the good knowledge of him. 'And thou, Solomon my
son,' said David,' know thou the God of thy father, and serve him
with a perfect heart' (1 Chron 28:9). Mind you, he first bids know
him, and then serve him with a perfect heart.

Q. Is it easy to get a true knowledge of God?--A. No; Thou must
cry after knowledge, and lift up thy voice for understanding.
'If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures; then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
find the knowledge of God' (Prov 2:4,5).

Q. How comes it to be so difficult a thing to attain the true
knowledge of God?--A. By reason of the pride and ignorance that
is in us, as also by reason of our wicked ways (Psa 10:4; Eph
4:18,19; Titus 1:16).

Q. But do not every one profess that they know God?--A. Yes; but
their supposed knowledge of him varieth as much as do their faces
or complexions, some thinking he is this, and some that.

Q. Will you shew me a little how they vary in their thoughts about
him?--A. Yes; Some count him a kind of an heartless God, that
will neither do evil nor good (Zeph 1:12). Some count him a kind
of an ignorant and blind God, that can neither know nor see through
the clouds (Job 22:13). Some again count him an inconsiderable
God, not worth the enjoying, if it must not be but with the loss
of this world, and their lusts (Job 21:9-15). Moreover, some think
him to be altogether such an one as themselves, one that hath as
little hatred to sin as themselves, and as little love to holiness
as themselves (Psa 50:21).

Q. Are there any more false opinions of God?--A. Yes; There are
three other false opinions of God. 1. Some think he is all mercy
and no justice, and that therefore they may live as they list (Rom
3:8). 2. Others think he is all justice and no mercy, and that
therefore they had as good go on in their sins and be damned, as
turn and be never the better (Jer 2:25). 3. Others think he is both
justice and mercy, but yet think also, that his justice is such
as they can pacify with their own good works, and save themselves
with their own right hand (Job 40:14); contrary to these scriptures
(Habb 1:13; Isa 45:21).

Q. How then shall I know when I have the true knowledge of God?--A.
When thy knowledge of him and the holy Scriptures agree.

Q. The Scriptures! Do not all false opinions of him flow from
the Scriptures?--A. No, in no wise; it is true, men father their
errors upon the Scriptures, when indeed they flow from the ignorance
of their hearts (Eph 4:18).

Q. But how if I do not understand the holy Bible, must I then go
without the true knowledge of God?--A. His name is manifested by
his Word: the Scriptures are they that testify of him (John 17:6-8,
5:39). And they are able to make the man of God perfect in all
things, and wise unto salvation through faith in Jesus Christ (2
Tim 3:15,16).

Q. But what must one that knoweth not God do, to get the knowledge
of God?--A. Let him apply his heart unto the Scriptures (Prov
22:17, 23:12). 'As unto a light that shineth in a dark place,'
even this world, 'until the day dawn, and the day star arise in
his heart' (2 Peter 1:19,20).

Q. But how shall I know when I have found by the Scriptures the
true knowledge of God?--A. When thou hast also found the true
knowledge of thyself (Isa 6:5; Job 42:5).

Q. What is it for me to know myself?--A. Then thou knowest thyself,
when thou art in thine own eyes, a loathsome, polluted, wretched,
miserable sinner; and that not anything done by thee, can pacify
God unto thee (Job 42:5; Eze 20:43,44; Rom 7:24).[11]


Of Confession of Sin.

Q. You have shewed me, if I will indeed worship God, I must first
know him aright, now then to the question in hand, pray how must
I worship him?--A. In confessing unto him (Neh 9:1-3).

Q. What must I confess?--A. Thou must confess thy transgressions
unto the Lord (Psa 32:5).

Q. Was this the way of the godly of old?--A. Yes; Nehemiah confessed
his sins (Neh 1:6). David confessed his sins (Psa 32:5). Daniel
confessed his sins (Dan 9:4). And they that were baptized by John
in Jordan confessed their sins (Matt 3:6).

Q. What sins must I confess to God?--A. All sins whatsoever: for
'He that covereth his sins shall not prosper, but whoso confesseth
and forsaketh them shall have mercy' (Prov 28:13; 1 John 1:9).

Q. But how if I do neither know nor remember all my sins?--A. Thou
must then search and try thy ways by the holy Word of God (Lam
3:40; Psa 77:6).

Q. But how if I do not make this search after my sins?--A. If thou
dost not, God will; if thou dost not search them out and confess
them, God will search them out and charge them upon thee, and tear
thee in pieces for them (Psa 50:21,22).

Q. Where must I begin to confess my sins?--A. Where God beginneth
to shew thee them. Observe, then, where God beginneth with conviction
for sin, and there begin thou with confession of it. Thus David
began to confess, thus Daniel began to confess (2 Sam 12:7-14;
Dan 9:3-9).

Q. What must I do when God hath shewed me any sin, to make right
confession thereof?--A. Thou must follow that conviction until it
shall bring thee to the original and fountain of that sin, which
is thine own heart (1 Kings 8:38; Psa 55:5).

Q. Is my heart then the fountain and original of sin?--A. Yes;
'For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness.
All these evil things come from within, and defile the man' (Mark
7:21,23).

Q. When a man sees this, what will he think of himself?--A. Then
he will not only think but conclude, that he is an unclean
thing, that his heart has deceived him, that it is most desperate
and wicked, that it may not be trusted by any means, that every
imagination and thought of his heart, naturally, is only evil,
and that continually (Isa 64:6; Prov 28:26; Isa 44:20; Gen 6:5).

Q. You have given me a very bad character of the heart, but how
shall I know that it is so bad as you count it?--A. Both by the
text and by experience.

Q. What do you mean by experience?--A. Keep thine eyes upon thy
heart, and also upon God's word, and thou shalt see with thine own
eyes, the desperate wickedness that is in thine heart, for thou
must know sin by the law, that bidding, thee do one thing, and
thy heart inclining to another (Rom 7:7-10).

Q. May I thus then know my heart?--A. Yes, that is something of
it, especially the carnality of thy mind, 'Because the carnal mind
is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be' (Rom 8:7).

Q. Can you particularize some few things wherein the wickedness
of the heart of man shews itself?--A. Yes; by its secret hankering
after sin, although the Word forbids it; by its deferring of
repentance; by its being weary of holy duties; by its aptness to
forget God, by its studying to lessen and hide sin; by its feigning
itself to be better than it is; by being glad when it can sin
without being seen of men; by its hardening itself against the
threatenings and judgments of God; by its desperate inclinings
to unbelief, atheism, and the like (Prov 1:24-26; Isa 43:22; Mal
1:12,13; Ju 3:7; Jer 2:32; Psa 106:21; Hosea 2:13; Prov 30:20;
Jer 2:25; Rom 1:32, 2:5; Zeph 1:11-13).[12]

Q. Is there any thing else to be done in order to a right confession
of sin?--A. Yes: Let this conviction sink down into thy heart,
that God sees much more wickedness in thee than thou canst see in
thyself. 'If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart,
and knoweth all things' (1 John 3:20); besides, he hath set thy
secret sins in the light of his countenance (Psa 90:8).

Q. Is there any thing else that must go to a right confession of
sin?--A. Yes; In thy confessions thou must greaten and aggravate
thy sin by all just circumstances.

Q. How must I do that?--A. By considering against how much light
and mercy thou hast sinned, against how much patience and forbearance
thou hast sinned; also against what warnings and judgments thou
hast sinned; and against how many of thine own vows, promises and
engagements, thou hast sinned: these things heighten and aggravate
sin (Ezra 9:10-14).

Q. But what need I confess my sins to God, seeing he knows them
already?--A. Confession of sin is necessary, for many reasons.

Q. Will you show me some of those reasons?--A. Yes; One is, by a
sincere and hearty confession of sin thou acknowledgest God to be
thy Sovereign Lord, and that he hath right to impose his law upon
thee (Exo 20).

Q. Can you show me another reason?--A. Yes; By confessing thy sin,
thou subscribest to his righteous judgments that are pronounced
against it (Psa 51:3,4).

Q. Can you show me another reason?--A. Yes; By confessing of sin,
thou showest how little thou deservest the least mercy from God.

Q. Have you yet another reason why I should confess my sins?--A.
Yes; By so doing thou showest whether thy heart loves it, or hates
it. He that heartily confesseth his sin, is like him who having
a thief or a traitor in his house, brings him out to condign
punishment; but he that forbears to confess, is like him who
hideth a thief or traitor against the laws and peace of our Lord
the King.

Q. Give me one more reason why I should confess my sins to God?--A.
He that confesseth his sin, casteth himself at the feet of God's
mercy, utterly condemns and casts away his own righteousness,
concludeth there is no way to stand just and acquit before God,
but by and through the righteousness of another; whether God is
resolved to bring thee, if ever he saves thy soul (Psa 51:1-3; 1
John 1:9; Phil 3:6-8).

Q. What frame of heart should I be in when I confess my sins?--A.
Do it HEARTILY, and to the best of thy power thoroughly. For to
feign, in this work, is abominable; to do it by the halves, is
wickedness; to do it without sense of sin cannot be acceptable.
And to confess it with the mouth, and to love it with the heart,
is a lying unto God, and a provocation of the eyes of his glory.

Q. What do you mean by feigning and dissembling in this work?--A.
When men confess it, yet know not what it is; or if they think
they know it, do not conclude it so bad as it is; or when men ask
pardon of God, but do not see their need of pardon; this man must
needs dissemble.

Q. What do you mean by doing it by the halves?--A. When men confess
some, but not all that they are convinced of; or if they confess
all, yet labour in their confession to lessen it (Prov 28:13; Job
31:33). Or when in their confession they turn not from all sin to
God, but from one sin to another (James 3:12). They turned, 'but
not to the most High,' none of them did exalt him (Hosea 7:16).

Q. What is it to confess sin without the sense of sins?--A. To do
it through custom, or tradition, when there is no guilt upon the
conscience, now this cannot be acceptable.

Q. What is it to confess it with the mouth and to love it with
the heart?--A. When men condemn it with their mouth, but refuse
to let it go (Job 20:12,13; Jer 8:5); when 'with their mouth they
show much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness'
(Eze 33:31).

Q. But I asked you what frame of heart I should be in, in my
confessions?--A. I have showed you how you should not be. Well,
I will show you now what frame of heart becomes you in your
confessions of sin. Labour by all means for a sense of the evil
that is in sin.

Q. What evil is there in sin?--A. No man with tongue can express
what may by the heart be felt of the evil of sin;[13] but this
know, it dishonoureth God (Rom 2:23). It provoketh him to wrath
(Eph 5:5,6). It damneth the soul (2 Thess 2:12).

Q. What else would you advise me to in this great work?--A. When
we confess sin, tears, shame, and brokenness of heart becomes us
(Jer 50:4; Isa 22:12; Psa 51:17; Jer 31:19).

Q. What else becomes me in my confessions of sin?--A. Great
detestation of sin, with unfeigned sighs and groans, that express
thou dost it heartily (Job 42:6; Eze 9:4; Jer 31:9).

Q. Is here all?--A. No; Tremble at the word of God; tremble at
every judgment, lest it overtake thee; tremble at every promise,
lest thou shouldest miss thereof: for, saith God, 'To this man
will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit,
and trembleth at my word' (Isa 66:2; Heb 4:1,2).

Q. What if I cannot thus confess my sins?--A. Bewail the hardness
of thy heart, keep close to the best preachers, remember that
thou hangest over hell, by the weak thread of an uncertain life.
And know, God counts it a great evil, not to be ashamed of, not
to blush at sin (Isa 63:17; Jer 6:15, 8:12).

Q. Are there no thanks to be rendered to God in confessions?--A.
O Yes. Thank him that he hath let thee see thy sins, thank him
that he hath given thee time to acknowledge thy sins; thou mightest
now have been confessing in hell: thank him also that he hath so
far condescended as to hear the self-bemoaning sinner, and that
he hath promised, SURELY to have mercy upon such (Jer 31:18-20).


Of Faith in Christ.

Q. I am glad that you have instructed me into this part of the
worship of God, I pray tell me also how else I should worship
him?--A. Thou must believe his word.

Q. Is that worshipping of God?--A. Yes; 'After the way which they
call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all
things which are written in the law and in the prophets,' &c.
(Acts 24:14).

Q. Why should believing be counted a part of God's worship?--A.
Because without faith it is impossible to please him (Heb 11:6).

Q. Why not possible to please him without believing?--A. Because
in all true worship, a man 'must believe that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.' Besides, he that
worships God, must also of necessity believe his word, else he
cannot worship with that reverence and fear that becomes him, but
will do it in a superstitious profane manner: 'For whatsoever is
not of faith is sin' (Rom 14:23).

Q. But do not all believe as you have said?--A. 'That which is
born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is born of the Spirit
is Spirit' (John 3:6). And again 'the children of the flesh, these
are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are
counted for the seed' (Rom 9:8).

Q. What do you mean by that?--A. Thou must be born twice before
thou canst truly believe once (John 3:3,5).

Q. How do you prove that?--A. Because believing is a christian
act, and none are true Christians but those that are born again.
But I mean by believing, believing unto salvation.

Q. Can you prove this?--A. Yes. They that believe in the name of
Christ are such which are born 'not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God' (John 1:13).

Q. What is believing?--A. It is such an act of a gracious soul,
as layeth hold on God's mercy through Christ (Acts 15:11).

Q. Why do you call it an act of a gracious soul?--A. Because their
minds are disposed that way, by 'the power of the Holy Ghost' (Rom
15:13).

Q. If such a poor sinner as I am would be saved from the wrath
to come, how must I believe?--A. Thy first question should be on
whom must I believe? (John 9:35,36).

Q. On whom then must I believe?--A. On the Lord Jesus Christ (Acts
16:31).

Q. Who is Jesus Christ that I might believe in him?--A. He is the
only begotten Son of God (John 3:16).

Q. Why must I believe on him?--A. Because he is the Saviour of
the world (2 Peter 1:1; 1 John 4:14).

Q. How is he the Saviour of the world?--A. By the Father's designation
and sending: 'For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn
the world, but that the world through him might be saved' (John
3:17).

Q. How did he come into the world?--A. In man's flesh, in which
flesh he fulfilled the law, died for our sins, conquered the devil
and death, and obtained eternal redemption for us (Gal 4:4; Rom
10:4, 8:3; Heb 2:14,15, 6:20).

Q. But is there no other way to be saved but by believing in Jesus
Christ?--A. 'There is none other name under heaven, given among
men, whereby we must be saved' (Acts 4:12); and therefore 'he that
believeth not, shall be damned' (Mark 16:16; John 3:18,36).

Q. What is believing on Jesus Christ?--A. It is a receiving of
him with what is in him, as the gift of God to thee a sinner (John
1:12).

Q. What is in Jesus Christ to encourage me to receive him?--A.
Infinite righteousness to justify thee, and the Spirit without
measure to sanctify thee (Isa 45:24,25; Dan 9:24; Phil 3:7-9; John
3:34).

Q. Is this made mine if I receive Christ?--A. Yes; If thou receive
him as God offereth him to thee (John 3:16).

Q. How doth God offer him to me?--A. Even as a rich man freely
offereth an alms to a beggar, and so must thou receive him (John
6:32-35).

Q. Hath he indeed made amends for sin? and would he indeed have me
accept of what he hath done?--A. That he hath made amends for sin
it is evident, because God, for Christ's sake, forgiveth thee. And
it is as evident that he would have thee accept thereof, because
he offereth it to thee, and hath sworn to give thee the utmost
benefit, to wit, eternal life, if thou dost receive it; yea, and
hath threatened thee with eternal damnation, if, after all this,
thou shalt neglect so great salvation (Eph 4:32; Rom 3:24; Matt
28:18-20; Acts 13:32-39; Heb 6:17,18, 2:3; Mark 16:16).

Q. But how must I be qualified before I shall dare to believe in
Christ?--A. Come sensible of thy sins, and of the wrath of God
due unto them, for thus thou art bid to come (Matt 11:28).

Q. Did ever any come thus to Christ?--A. David came thus (Psa
51:1-3); Paul and the jailor came thus (Acts 9:6, 16:30); also
Christ's murderers came thus (Acts 2:37).

Q. But doth it not seem most reasonable that we should first mend
and be good?--A. The 'whole have no need of the physician, but
they that are sick'; Christ came 'not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance' (Mark 2:17).

Q. But is it not the best way, if one can, to mend first?--A. This
is just as if a sick man should say, Is it not best for me to be
well before I go to the physician; or as if a wounded man should
say, When I am cured I will lay on the plaster.[14]

Q. But when a poor creature sees its vileness, it is afraid to
come to Christ, is it not?--A. Yes; but without ground, for he
hath said, 'Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong,
fear not': and 'to this man will I look, even to him that is poor
and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word' (Isa 35:4,
66:2).

Q. What encouragement can be given us thus to come?--A. The prodigal
came thus, and his father received him, and fell upon his neck
and kissed him (Luke 15). Thus he received the Colossians, and
consequently all that are saved (Col 2:13).

Q. Will you give me one more encouragement?--A. The promises are
so worded, that they that are scarlet sinners, crimson sinners,
blasphemous sinners, have encouragement to come to him with hopes of
life (Isa 1:18; Mark 3:28; John 6:37; Luke 24:42,43; Acts 13:26).

Q. Shall every one that believeth be saved?--A. If they believe
as the Scriptures have said, if the Scriptures be fulfilled in
their believing (John 7:38; James 2:23).

Q. What do you mean by that?--A. When faith, which a man saith
he hath, proveth itself to be of the right kind by its acts and
operations in the mind of a poor sinner (James 2:19-23).

Q. Why, are there many kinds of faith?--A. Yes. There is a faith
that will stand with a heart as hard as a rock; a short-winded
faith, which dureth for a while, and in time of temptation such
fall away (Luke 8:13).

Q. Is there any other kind of faith?--A. Yes. There is a faith that
hath no more life in it than hath the body of a dead man (James
2:26).

Q. Is there yet another of these unprofitable faiths?--A. Yes. There
is a faith that is of ourselves, and not of the special grace of
God (Eph 2:8).

Q. Tell me if there be yet another?--A. There is a faith that
standeth 'in the wisdom of men,' and not 'in the power of God' (1
Cor 2:5).

Q. Is here all?--A. No. There is a faith that seems to be holy,
but it will not do, because it is not the most holy faith (2 Peter
2:9; Jude 20).

Q. Alas! if there be so many kinds of faith that will not profit
to salvation, how easy is it for me to be deceived?--A. It is easy
indeed, and therefore the Holy Ghost doth in this thing so often
caution us, 'Be not deceived' (1 Cor 6:9). 'Let no man deceive
you' (Eph 5:6), and 'If a man think himself to be something when
he is nothing, he deceiveth himself' (Gal 6:3).

Q. But is there no way to distinguish the right faith from that
which is wrong?--A. Yes; and that by the manner of its coming and
operation.

Q. What do you mean by the manner of its coming?--A. Nay, you must
make two questions of this one; that is, what is it for faith to
come, and in what manner doth it come?

Q. Well then, what is it for faith to come?--A. This word, faith
comes, supposeth thou wert once without it; it also supposeth that
thou didst not fetch it whence it was; it also supposeth it hath
a way of coming (Gal 3:23-25).

Q. That I was once without it, you intimated before, but must I
take it without proof for granted?--A. I will give you a proof or
two: 'God hath concluded them all in unbelief' (Rom 11:32). And
again it is said, 'faith cometh' (Rom 10:17). And again, the Holy
Ghost insinuateth our estate to be dreadful 'before faith came'
(Gal 3:23).

Q. Why, how is it with men, before faith comes?--A. Without faith,
or before faith comes, it is impossible to please God, for whether
their actions be civil or religious, they sin in all they do. The
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, and the ploughing of
the wicked is sin (Prov 21:4,27).

Q. Is not this a very sad condition?--A. Yes; but this is not all,
for their present unbelief bindeth them over to wrath, by shutting
them up to the law; it also draweth them away from God, and will
drown them in everlasting damnation, if the grace of God prevent
not (Gal 3:23; Heb 3:17,18; John 3:36).

Q. What if a man saw himself in this condition?--A. There are many
see themselves in this condition.

Q. How came they to see it?--A. By the preaching and hearing the
Word of God (John 16:8,9).

Q. And what do such think of themselves?--A. They do not only
think, but know that in this condition they are 'without Christ,
without hope, and without God in the world' (Eph 2:12).

Q. Are not they happy that see not themselves in this condition?--A.
Yes. If they have seen themselves delivered therefrom by a work
of faith in their souls, else not.

Q. How do you mean?--A. I mean if they have seen themselves delivered
from this state, by being by the Word and Spirit of God implanted
into the faith of Christ (Rom 11:17-19).

Q. Are not they happy that are never troubled with this sad sight
of their condition?--A. They are just so happy as is that man
who lieth fast asleep in his house while it is on fire about his
ears. Can a man be happy, that is ignorant that he is without God
and Christ, and hope? Can a man be happy that is ignorant that
he is hanging over hell by the poor weak thread of an uncertain
life? For this is the state of such an one.[15]

Q. But may not faith come to a man without he see himself to be
first in this condition?--A. It is God's ordinary way to convince
men of this their sad condition before he revealeth to them the
righteousness of faith, or work faith in them to lay hold of that
righteousness (John 16:9-11; Gal 3:23-25).

Q. How then do you conclude of them that never saw themselves
shut up by unbelief under sin and the curse of God?--A. I will not
judge them for the future, God may convert them before they die;
but at present their state is miserable: for because they are
shut up and held prisoners by the law, by their lusts, and by the
devil, and unbelief; therefore they cannot so much as with their
hearts desire that God would have mercy upon them, and bring them
out of their snares and chains.

Q. Then do you count it better for a man to see his condition by
nature than to be ignorant thereof?--A. Better a thousand times
to see it in this world than to see it in hell fire, for he must
see it there or here: now if he sees it here, this is the place
of prayer; here is the preaching of the word, which is God's
ordinance, to beget faith. Besides, here God applieth promises
of mercy to the desolate, and Christ also hath protested that he
that cometh to him he 'will in no wise cast out' (John 6:37).

Q. I am convinced that I was once without faith, and also that I
cannot fetch it, but pray tell me the way of its coming?--A. 'Faith
cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God' (Rom 10:17).

Q. How by hearing?--A. God mixeth it with the Word when he absolutely
intendeth the salvation of the sinner (Heb 4:2; Acts 13:48).

Q. And how do men hear when faith is mixed with the Word?--A. They
hear the Word, 'not as the word of men, but, as it is in truth, the
Word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe'
(1 Thess 2:13).

Q. Pray tell me now the manner of its coming?--A. It comes through
difficulty, it comes gradually.

Q. What are the difficulties which oppose it at its coming?--A.
Sense of unworthiness, guilt of conscience, natural reason,
unbelief, and arguments forged in hell, and thence suggested by
the devil into the heart against it (Luke 5:8; Mark 9:24; Isa 6:5;
Rom 4:18-21).

Q. How doth faith come gradually?--A. Perhaps at first it is but
like a grain of mustard-seed, small, and weak (Matt 17:20).

Q. Will you explain it further?--A. Faith, at first, perhaps may
have its excellency lie in view only, that is, in seeing where
justification and salvation is; after that it may step a degree
higher, and be able to say, it may be, or who can tell but I may
obtain this salvation? again, it may perhaps go yet a step higher
and arrive to some short and transient assurance (Heb 11:13; Joel
2:13,14; Zeph 2:3; Psa 30:7).[16]

Q. But doth faith come only by hearing?--A. It is usually begotten
by the word preached, but after it is begotten, it is increased
several ways. It is increased by prayer (Luke 17:5; Mark 9:24). It
is increased by christian conference (Rom 1:12). It is increased
by reading (Rom 16:25,26). It is increased by meditation (1 Tim
4:12-16). It is increased by the remembrance of former experiences
(Matt 16:8,9).

Q. What do these things teach us?--A. They teach us, that the men
of this world are very ignorant of, and as much without desire
after faith: they neither hear, nor pray, confer, nor read, nor
meditate for the sake of faith.

Q. But you said even now, that this faith was distinguished from
that which profiteth not to salvation, as by the manner of its
coming, so by its operation: pray what is its operation?--A. It
causeth the soul to see in the light thereof, that there is no
righteousness in this world that can save the sinner (Isa 64:6).

Q. How doth it give the soul this sight?--A. By giving him to
understand the law, and his own inability to fulfil it (Gal 2:16).

Q. And doth it always shew the soul where justifying righteousness
is?--A. Yes. It shews that justifying righteousness is only to be
found in the Lord Jesus Christ, in what he hath done and suffered
in the flesh (Isa 45:24,25; Phil 3:3-9).

Q. How doth faith find this righteousness in Christ?--A. By the
word, which is therefore called the word of faith, because faith,
by that, findeth sufficient righteousness in him (Rom 10:6-9).

Q. How else doth it operate in the soul?--A. It applieth this
righteousness to the sinner, and also helps him to embrace it (Rom
3:21,22; 1 Cor 1:30; Gal 2:20).

Q. How else doth it operate?--A. By this application of Christ,
the soul is quickened to life, spiritualized and made heavenly. For
right faith quickeneth to spiritual life, purifies and sanctifies
the heart; and worketh up the man that hath it, into the image of
Jesus Christ (Col 2:12,13; Acts 15:9, 26:18; 2 Cor 3:18).

Q. How else doth it operate?--A. It giveth the soul peace with
God through Jesus Christ (Rom 5:1).

Q. Surely Christ is of great esteem with them that have this
faith in him, is he not?--A. Yes, Yes. Unto them therefore which
believe he is precious, precious in his person, precious in his
undertakings, precious in his Word (1 Peter 2:7, 1:18,19; 2 Peter
1:3,4).

Q. Can these people then, that have this faith, endure to have
this Christ spoken against?--A. O! No! This is a sword in their
bones, and a burden that they cannot bear (Psa 42:10; Zeph 3:19).[17]

Q. Doth it not go near them when they see his ways and people
discountenanced?--A. Yes; and they also choose rather to be despised
and persecuted with them, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for
a season (Heb 11:24,25).

Q. Do they not pray much for his second coming?--A. Yes, yes;
they would fain see him on this side the clouds of heaven, their
'conversation is in heaven, from whence also they look for the
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ' (Phil 3:20).

Q. And do they live in this world as if he were to come presently?--A.
Yes; for his coming will be glorious and dreadful, full of mercy
and judgment. 'The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the
night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and
the works that are therein shall be burned up. Seeing then that
all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought
we to be in all holy conversation and godliness' (2 Peter 3:10,11).


Of Prayer.

Q. Well, I am glad that you have shewed me that I must worship
God by confession of sin, and faith in Jesus Christ: Is there any
other thing a part of the true worship of God?--A. Yes, several;
I will mention only two more at this time.

Q. What are they?--A. Prayer and self-denial.

Q. Is prayer then a part of the worship of God?--A. Yes; a great
part of it.

Q. How do you prove that?--A. 'O come let us worship and bow down:
let us kneel before the Lord our maker' (Psa 95:6).

Q. Is there another scripture proves it?--A. Yes; 'Then came she
and worshiped him, saying, Lord, help me' (Matt 15:25).

Q. What is prayer?--A. A sincere, sensible, affectionate pouring
out of the soul to God in the name of Christ for what God hath
promised (Prov 15:8; Jer 31:18,19; Psa 42:2-5; John 14:13,14; 1
John 5:14).

Q. Doth not every body pray?--A. No; 'The wicked, through the
pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in
all his thoughts' (Psa 10:4).

Q. What will become of them that do not pray?--A. They do not
worship God, and he will destroy them; 'Pour out thy fury [said
the prophet] upon the heathen,--and upon the families that call
not on thy name' (Jer 10:25; Psa 79:6).

Q. But seeing God knoweth what we want, why doth he not give us
what we need, without praying?--A. His counsel and wisdom leadeth
him otherwise. 'Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them' (Eze 36:37).

Q. Why will God have us pray?--A. Because he would be acknowledged
by thee, that he is above thee, and therefore would have thee come
to him as the mean come to the mighty. Thus Abraham came unto him
(Gen 18:27,30).

Q. Is there another reason why I should pray?--A. Yes. For by prayer
thou acknowledgest, that help is not in thine own power (2 Chron
20:6,12).

Q. What reason else have you why I should pray?--A. By prayer thou
confessest that help is only in him (Psa 62:1).

Q. What other reason have you?--A. By prayer thou confessest thou
canst not live without his grace and mercy (Matt 14:30; Heb 4:16).

Q. Are all that pray heard of the Lord?--A. No; 'They looked,'
that is prayed, 'but there was none to save; even unto the Lord,
but he answered them not' (2 Sam 22:42).

Q. To what doth God compare the prayers which he refuseth to
answer?--A. He compareth them to the howling of a dog (Hosea 7:14).

Q. Who be they whose prayers God will not answer?--A. Theirs, who
think to be heard for their much speaking, and vain repetition
(Matt 6:7).

Q. Is there any other whose prayer God refuseth?--A. Yes; There
are that ask and have not, because what they ask, they would spend
upon their lusts (James 4:3).

Q. Is there any other whose prayer God refuseth?--A. Yes; 'If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me' (Psa
66:18).[18]

Q. Is the regarding of sin in our heart such a deadly hinderance
to prayer?--A. 'Son of man,' saith God, 'these men have set up
their idols in their heart, and have put the stumblingblock of
their iniquity before their face; should I be enquired of at all
by them? I will set my face against that man, and will make him
a sign and a proverb. And I will cut him off from the midst of my
people' (Eze 14:3,8).

Q. Whose prayers be they that God will hear?--A. The prayers of
the poor and needy (Psa 34:6; Isa 41:17).

Q. What do you mean by the poor?--A. Such as have poverty in spirit
(Matt 5:3).

Q. Who are they that are poor in spirit?--A. They that are sensible
of the want and necessity of all those things of God, that prepare
a man to the kingdom of heaven.

Q. What things are they?--A. Faith, hope, love, joy, peace, a new
heart, the Holy Ghost, sanctification. See James 2:5; 2 Thessalonians
2:16; Ezekiel 36:26,27.

Q. What do you mean by the needy?--A. Those whose souls long and
cannot be satisfied without the enjoyment of these blessed things
(Psa 63:1, 119:20).

Q. Will God hear the prayers of such?--A. Yes; 'For he satisfieth
the longing soul, and filleth the hungry soul with goodness' (Psa
107:9).

Q. How shall I know that I am one of those to whom God will give
these things?--A. If thou seest a beauty in them beyond the beauty
of all other things (Psa 110:3).

Q. How else shall I know [that] he heareth me?--A. If thou desirest
them for their beauty's sake (Psa 90:14,17).

Q. How else should I know I shall have them?--A. When thy groanings
after them are beyond expression (Rom 8:26).[19]

Q. How else should I know, and so be encouraged to pray?--A.
When thou followest hard after God in all his ordinances for the
obtaining of them (Isa 4:1,3, 64:5).

Q. How else should I know?--A. When thou makest good use of that
little thou hast already (Rev 3:8).

Q. Are here all the good signs that my prayers shall be heard?--A.
No; there is one more without which thou shalt never obtain.

Q. Pray what is that?--A. Thou must plead with God, the name and
merits of Jesus Christ, for whose sake only God giveth thee
these things. If we ask any thing in his name, he heareth us, and
whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, saith Christ I will do
it (John 14:13,14).

Q. Doth God always answer presently?--A. Sometimes he doth, and
sometimes he doth not (Isa 30:19; Dan 10:12).

Q. Is not God's deferring, a sign of his anger?--A. Sometimes it
is not, and sometimes it is.

Q. When is it no sign of his anger?--A. When we have not wickedly
departed from him by our sins (Luke 18:7).

Q. When is it a sign of his anger?--A. When we have backslidden,
when we have not repented some former miscarriages (Hosea 5:14,15).

Q. Why doth God defer to hear their prayers that hath not wickedly
departed from him?--A. He loves to hear their voice, to try their
faith, to see their importunity, and to observe how they can
wrestle with him for a blessing (Cant 2:14; Matt 15:22-28; Luke
11:5-8; Gen 32:25-28).

Q. But is not deferring to answer prayer a great discouragement to
praying?--A. Though it is, because of our unbelief, yet it ought
not, because God is faithful. Therefore 'men ought always to pray,
and not to faint' (Luke 18:1-8).[20]


Of Self-Denial.

Q. I am glad you have thus far granted my request: but you told
me that there was another part of God's worship; pray repeat that
again?--A. It is self-denial.

Q. Now I remember it well; pray how do you prove that self-denial
is called a part of God's worship?--A. It is said of Abraham,
that when he went to offer up his son Isaac upon the altar for a
burnt-offering, which was to him a very great part of self-denial,
that he counted that act of his worshipping God.

Q. Will you be pleased to read the text?--A. Yes; 'And Abraham
said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and
the lad will go yonder and worship,' &c. This now was when he was
a-going to slay Isaac (Gen 22:5).

Q. What is self-denial?--A. It is for a man to forsake his ALL,
for the sake of Jesus Christ.

Q. Will you prove this by a scripture or two?--A. Yes; 'Whosoever
he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my
disciple' (Luke 14:33).

Q. Indeed this is a full place, can you give me one more?--A. Yes;
'What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. Yea,
doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may
win Christ,' &c. (Phil 3:7,8).

Q. These two are indeed a sufficient answer to my question; but pray
will you now give me some particular instances of the self-denial
of them that have heretofore been the followers of Christ?--A.
Yes; Abel denied himself to the losing of his blood (Gen 4:8).
Abraham denied himself to the losing of his country and his
father's house (Gen 12:1-4). Moses denied himself of a crown and
a kingdom, and of ease and tranquility (Heb 11:24-27). Joseph
denied himself of fleshly lusts (Gen 39:7-9).

Q. But these men each of them denied themselves but of some things,
did they?--A. You see Abel lost all, his blood and all; Abraham
lost his country to the hazard of his life (Gen 12:13). So did
Moses in leaving the crown and kingdom (Heb 11:27). And Joseph in
denying his mistress (Gen 39:10-15).

Q. Will you discourse a little particularly of self-denial?--A.
With all my heart.

Q. First then, pray in what spirit must this self-denial be
performed?--A. It must be done in the spirit of faith, of love,
and of a sound mind. Otherwise, if a man should sell all that he
hath and give to the poor, and his body to be burnt besides, it
would profit him nothing (1 Cor 13:1-3).

Q. Who are like to miscarry here?--A. They whose ends in self-denial
are not according to the proposals of the gospel.

Q. Who are they?--A. They that suffer through strife and vain-glory;
or thus, they who seek in their sufferings the praise of men more
than the glory of Christ, and profit of their neighbour.

Q. Who else are like to miscarry here?--A. They that have designs
like Ziba to ingratiate themselves by their pretended self-denial
into the affections of the godly, and to enrich themselves by this
means (2 Sam 16:1-4).

Q. Are there any other like to miscarry here?--A. Yes. They that
by denying themselves think with the Pharisee, to make themselves
stand more righteous in God's eyes than others (Luke 18:11,12).

Q. Who else are in danger of miscarrying here?--A. They who have
fainted in their works, they whose self-denial hath at last been
overcome by self-love (Gal 3:4, 6:9).

Q. Shall I propound a few more questions?--A. If you please.

Q. What then if a man promiseth to deny himself hereafter and not
now, is not this one step to this kind of worship?--A. No, by no
means; for the reason why this man refuseth to deny himself now,
is because his heart at present sticks closer to his lusts and
the world, than to God and Christ.[21]

Q. Can you give me a Scripture instance to make this out?--A.
Yes; Esau never intended for ever to part with the blessing, he
intended to have it hereafter; but God counted his not choosing
of it at present, a despising of it, and a preferring of his lusts
before it: and therefore when he would, God would not, but reject
both him and his tears (Gen 25:30-34; Heb 12:14-16).

Q. How and if a man shall say thus, I am willing to deny myself
in many things, though he cannot deny himself in all, is not this
one step in this part of this worship of God?--A. No, in no wise;
for this man doth, just like Saul, he will slay a part, and will
keep a part alive; the kingdom must be taken from him also (1 Sam
15).

Q. How if a man he willing to lose all but his life?--A. He that
'will save his life shall lose it,' but he that 'will lose his
life for my sake,' saith Christ, 'shall keep it unto life eternal'
(Matt 16:25; John 12:25).

Q. How if a man has been willing to lose all that he hath, but
is not now, will not God accept of his willingness in time past,
though he be otherwise now?--A. No; for the true disciple must
deny himself daily, take up his cross daily, and go after Jesus
Christ (Luke 9:23).

Q. But how if a man carrieth it well outwardly, so that he doth
not dishonour the gospel before men, may not this be counted
self-denial?--A. No, if he be not right at heart; for though man
looketh on the outward appearance, God looketh at the heart (1
Sam 16:7).

Q. But if I be afraid my heart may deceive me in this great work,
if hard things come upon me hereafter, is there no way to find
out whether it will deceive me then or no?--A. I will give you a
few answers to this question, and will shew you first whose heart
is like to deceive him in this work.

Q. Will you befriend me so much?--A. Yes. 1. He that makes not
daily conscience of self-denial, is very unlike to abide a disciple
for times to come, if difficult. Judas did not deny himself daily,
and therefore fell when the temptation came (John 12:6).

Q. Will you give me another sign?--A. Yes. He that indulgeth any
one secret lust under a profession, is not like to deny himself
in all things for Christ.

Q. Who are they that indulge their lusts?--A. They that make
provision for them, either in apparel, or diet, or otherwise (Rom
13:12-14; Isa 3:6-24; Amos 6:3-6).

Q. Who else do so?--A. They that excuse their sins, and keep them
disguised that they may not be reprehended, as Saul did, &c. (1
Sam 15:18-22).

Q. Who else are they that indulge their lusts?--A. They that heap
up to themselves such teachers as favour their lusts (2 Tim 4:3,4;
Isa 30:10).

Q. Who else do indulge their sins?--A. They that choose rather to
walk by the imperfect lives of professors than by the holy Word of
God: or thus, they that make the miscarriages of some good men an
encouragement unto themselves to forbear to be exact in self-denial,
these eat up the sins of God's people as men eat bread (Hosea
4:7-9).

Q. Will you now shew me who are like to do this part of God's
worship acceptably?--A. Yes; he whose heart is set against sin as
sin, is like to deny himself acceptably (Rom 7:13,14).

Q. Who else?--A. He that hath the sense and savour of forgiveness
of sins upon his heart (2 Cor 5:14).

Q. Who else is like to deny himself well?--A. He that hath his
affections set upon things above, where Christ sitteth at the
right hand of God (Col 3:1-5).

Q. Who else is like to deny himself well for Christ?--A. He that
seeth a greater treasure in self-denial, than in self-seeking (2
Cor 12:9-11; Heb 11:24-26).

Q. Are there none other signs of one that is like to do this part
of God's worship acceptably?--A. Yes; he that takes up his cross
daily, and makes Christ's doctrine his example (Luke 6:47,48; John
12:25,26).

Q. But how do you discover a man to be such a one?--A. He keepeth
this heart with all diligence, he had rather die than sin; ill
carriages of professors break his heart, nothing is so dear to
him as the glory of Christ (Prov 4:23; Num 11:15; Phil 3:18; Acts
20:24).[22]

Q. Pray, can yo give me some motive to self-denial?--A. Yes; the
Lord Jesus denied himself for thee; what sayest thou to that?

Q. Wherein did Christ deny himself for me?--A. He left his heaven
for thee, he denied for thy sake to have so much of this world
as hath a fox or a bird, and he spilt his most precious blood for
thee (John 6:38; Luke 9:58; 2 Cor 8:9; Rev 1:5).

Q. Can you give another motive to self-denial?--A. Yes; 'What shall
it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul?' (Mark 8:36).

Q. But why doth God require self-denial of them that will be
saved?--A. God doth not require self-denial as the means to obtain
salvation, but hath laid it down as a proof of the truth of a
man's affections to God and Christ.

Q. How is self-denial a proof of the truth of a man's affections
to God?--A. In that for the sake of his service, he leaveth all
his enjoyments in this world. Thus he proved Abraham's affections
(Gen 22:12). Thus he proved Peter's affections (Matt 4:18-22)
and thus he proved their affection that you read of in the gospel
(Luke 9:57-73).

Q. What reason else can you produce why God requireth self-denial?--A.
Self-denial is one of the distinguishing characters by which true
Christians are manifested from the feigned ones: for those that
are feigned, flatter God with their mouths, but their hearts seek
themselves; but the sincere, for the love that he hath to Christ,
forsaketh all that he hath for his sake (Psa 78:36,37; Eze
33:31,32).[23]

Q. Is there yet another reason why God requireth self-denial of
them that profess his name?--A. Yes; because by self-denial the
power and goodness of the truths of God are made manifest to the
incredulous world. For they cannot see but by the self-denial
of God's people, that there is such power, glory, goodness, and
desirableness in God's truth as indeed there is (Dan 3:16,28; Phil
1:12,13).

Q. Have you another reason why God requireth self-denial?--A. Yes;
because self-denial prepareth a man, though not for the pardon
of his sin, yet for that far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory, that is laid up only for them that deny all that they
have for the Lord Jesus, his name, and cause in this world (2 Cor
4:8-10,17; 2 Thess 1:5,6).

Q. Before you conclude, will you give me a few instances of the
severity of God's hand upon some professors, that have not denied
themselves when called thereto by him?--A. Yes, willingly; Lot's
wife for but looking behind her towards Sodom, when God called
her from it, was stricken from heaven, and turned into a pillar
of salt; therefore remember Lot's wife (Gen 19:17,26; Luke 17:31,32).

Q. Can you give me another instance?--A. Yes; Esau for not denying
himself of one morsel of meat was denied a share in the blessing,
and could never obtain it after, though he sought it carefully
with tears (Gen 25:32-34; Heb 12:16,17).

Q. Have you at hand another instance?--A. Yes; Judas for not denying
himself, lost Christ, his soul, and heaven: and is continued the
great object of God's wrath among all damned souls (John 12:5,6;
Luke 22:3-6; Matt 26:14-16; Acts 1:25).

Q. Will you give me one more instance, and so conclude?--A. Yes;
Ananias and Sapphira his wife, did for the want of self-denial,
pull upon themselves such wrath of God, that he slew them, while
they stood in the midst before the apostles (Acts 5:1-11).


The Conclusion.

Before I wind up this discourse, I would lay down these few things
for you to consider of, and meditate upon.

I. Consider, that seeing every one by nature are accounted sinners;
it is no matter whether thy actual sins be little or great, few
or many, thy sinful nature hath already lain thee under the curse
of the law.

II. Consider, That therefore thou hast already ground for humiliation,
sins to repent of, wrath to fly from, or a soul to be damned.

III. Consider, That time stays not for thee, and also that as
time goes, sin increaseth; so that at last the end of thy time,
and the completing of thy sin, are like to come upon thee in one
moment.

IV. Bring thy last day often to thy bedside, and ask thy heart,
if this morning thou wast to die, if thou be ready to die or no.

V. Know it is a sad thing to lie a dying, and to be afraid to
die; to lie a dying and not to know whither thou art going; to lie
a dying, and not to know whether good angels or bad must conduct
thee out of this miserable world.

VI. Be often remembering what a blessed thing it is to be saved,
to go to heaven, to be made like angels, and to dwell with God
and Christ to all eternity.

VII. Consider how sweet the thought of salvation will be to thee
when thou seest thyself in heaven, whilst others are roaring in
hell.[24]

The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit.



FOOTNOTES:

1. How awful the thought that persons should sit under so faithful
and searching a ministry, and still remain in their sins. Is it
so to the present day under a faithful ministry? then, Oh my soul,
how is it with thee?--Ed.

2. A painful recollection of his long and cruel imprisonment for
conscience sake led Bunyan to feel the value of liberty. Still he
forcibly appeals to his reader on the necessity of private judgment
in divine things. His twelve years' converse with God and his
word in prison had confirmed his principles; while divine love
had swallowed up the fear of man.--Ed.

3. Faith is the only principle that, by the power of the Holy Ghost,
can purify the heart. It leads the soul into holy communion with
a pure and holy God, and thus cleanses the heart.--Ed.

4. All mankind, as born into the world, show, as soon as the mental
powers open, aversion to God, to his purity, his law, his gospel;
the doctrines of grace and the work of the Spirit upon the heart.
A solemn proof of the universal taint given by original sin.--Ed.

5. By the word 'public' is to be understood a federal head, or the
representative of all his posterity. Adam's faith can only save
his own soul; his sin taints all his seed.--Ed.

6. A state of hostility to God plunges the soul into mental darkness,
rage, horror, anguish, despair, and endless and unutterable
misery and woe. How ought we to love the Lord Jesus for his GREAT
salvation!--Ed.

7. It is a very modern custom to have the place of execution within
a city--formerly they were always without--their position being
still noted by the name 'Gallow Knowe,' the knoll or mound of the
gallows; 'Gallowgate,' the gate or way leading to the gallows;
and so on. Happily for the well-being of society, these exhibitions
are less frequent than they formerly were.

8. 'That servant which knew his lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes' (Luke 12:47)--Ed.

9. Which is the greatest sinner; he who invents scandal, or he who
encourages the inventor to retail it? If there were no receivers,
there would be no thieves.--Ed.

10. The terms in which this question is put, shows that the little
children here intended were capable of repentance and faith. That
Bunyan believed, as Toplady did, the salvation of all that die in
infancy by the atonement of Christ, there can be no doubt. 'In my
remarks on Dr. Rowell, I testified my firm belief that the souls
of all departed infants are with God in glory.' See the Introduction
to Toplady's Historic Proof.--Ed.

11. The knowledge of ourselves as vile and abominable, hopeless
and helpless, is an essential step towards our recovery. The next
step that leads to heaven, and lands us there, is to 'know the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,' as revealed in
the word of truth. 'This is eternal life.'--Ed.

12. The unrenewed heart is the sink of sin, the fountain of pollution.
'Out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies; these defile a
man.' Create in us a clean heart, O God!--Ed.

13. No poor soul was more severely visited with these feelings
than Bunyan. 'Now I beheld the condition of the dog and toad; and
counted the state of every thing that God had made far better than
this state of mine.'--Grace Abounding, No. 104.--Ed.

14. How pointed and forcible is this illustration of the absurdity
of neglecting the Physician of souls, when the malady of sin is
felt. The more desperate our disease, the faster we should fly to
Christ for cure.--Ed.

15. The awful condition of the unconverted consists in their being
in a state of separation from God, insensible of that dismal state,
utterly unable to extricate themselves out of it, and loathsome
to God while they continue in it. Reader, do you recollect when
this was your state; if not, what hope is there that you have
passed from death unto life?--Ed.

16. The operation of faith is by steps. 'To open their eyes,' 'to
turn them from darkness to light,' 'from power of Satan to God,'
'forgiveness of sins,' 'the heavenly inheritance' (Acts 26:18).--Ed.

17. Under a fear lest he had spoken against Christ, Bunyan thus
expresses his misery; 'I fell into a very deep pause about the
most fearful state my sin had brought me to; and, lifting up my
head, I saw as if the sun did grudge to give me light, and as if
the very stones in the street, and tiles upon the houses, did bend
themselves against me.'--Grace Abounding, No. 186.--Ed.

18. 'The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord;
but the prayer of the upright is his delight. He loveth him that
followeth after righteousness' (Prov 15:8,9). That our prayers
may be heard, the heart should be right with God, and our souls
at peace with him through the Son of his love.--Mason.--Ed.

19. These are parts of a Christian's experience, admirably
illustrated in that extraordinary book by Bunyan, 'Grace Abounding
to the Chief of Sinners.'--Ed.

20. All-prevailing prayers must be offered up through the mediation of
Christ, in obedience to God's command, with an eye to his glory,
and for what is agreeable to his will and heavenly wisdom to grant.
'Lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting' (1 Tim 2:8).
God's service must be in faith, love, and purity of heart.--Ryland.--Ed.

21. How debased is the human heart, to delay one moment in giving
up its poor all for Christ. In him dwells the fulness of the Godhead;
he has unsearchable riches of wisdom and knowledge to bestow;
all-sufficient grace and strength, to enable us to do and suffer
his will; and everlasting glory at the close of our pilgrimage.--Ed.

22. No tongue can utter, or heart conceive, the unspeakable reward
which an unwearied, unfainting diligence in well-doing, attends
the humble believer; it begins in this world, and is consummated
in endless glory.--Ed.

23. Christian, you are not your own, you are bought with a price
far above all the treasures of the earth. You must not do as you
please, but study to do the will of your heavenly Father. The
man who is bent upon doing his own will, renounces the name of
Christian. REBEL against God is inscribed upon all who do not his
will.--Ed.

24. How blessed is the hope of the Christian; full of life, power,
and much assurance. The salvation by Christ is infinitely precious;
it redeems the souls from all possible misery, and introduces
it to the favour, love, and protection of almighty God, who will
save it from the ruins of time, till possessed of the riches of
eternity.--Ed.

***

SEASONABLE COUNSEL: OR, ADVICE TO SUFFERERS.

BY JOHN BUNYAN.

London: Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultry, 1684.




ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

THIS valuable treatise was first published in a pocket volume in
1684, and has only been reprinted in Whitfield's edition of Bunyan's
works, 2 vols. folio, 1767.

No man could have been better qualified to give advice to sufferers
for righteousness' sake, than John Bunyan: and this work is
exclusively devoted to that object. Shut up in a noisome jail,
under the iron hand of persecution, for nearly thirteen years, in
the constant fear of being hanged as a malefactor, for refusing
conformity to the national liturgy, he well knew what sufferings
were, and equally well did he know the sources of consolation.
It was wisely ordered by Divine Providence, that before the king
pardoned him, he had a legal return under the hand and seal of the
sheriff of Bedfordshire, certifying the reasons of this frightful
imprisonment. This is entered in the minutes of the Privy Council
on the 8th and 15th of May, 1672; and it proves that he was thus
cruelly punished for "being at conventicles for nonconformity" and
for no other cause. In this "Advice" we find his opinion on the
origin of persecution--the instruments--the motives--its cruelty--with
cautions, counsels, and support to the persecuted. He considers
persecution a strange anomaly,--"The reason is that Christianity
is a harmless thing--that be it never so openly professed it hurts
no man." Simple-hearted, honest John, thou dreamest. What wouldest
thou have thought of a system by which all would have been taught
to tag their laces and mend their own pots and kettles? What would
have become of thy trade as a brazier? Christianity teaches all
mankind not to trust in those empirics who profess to cure souls
for Peter's pence, tithes, mortuaries, and profits; but to go by
themselves to the Great Physician, and he will pour in his wine
and oil, his infallible remedies for a sin-sick soul, without
money and without price. To Bunyan this was not only harmless to
others, but the most boundless mercy that God could bestow upon
man. What could be more destructive to the hierarchy of popes,
cardinals, and papal nuncios of the Latin, with the patriarchs,
archimandrites, and papas of the Greek churches? A system by which
all their services are dispensed with, and priestly and prelatic
pride is leveled with the dust. Can we wonder that those who
preached the holy, humbling, self-denying doctrines of the cross,
were persecuted to the death? Bunyan's opinion is, that Satan
is the author of persecution, by which he intended to root out
Christianity. The whirlwind and the tempest drives away those who
are not rooted and grounded in the faith, some of whom may have
stood like stately cedars until the trying time of trial came.
But the humble Christian in such a season takes deeper root--a
stronger grasp. Faith, his anchor, is sure and steadfast; it enters
eternity and heaven, where Satan can find no entrance to disturb
its hold. In persecution, men are but the devil's tools, and little
think that they are doing his drudgery.

The man of God declares the truth in plain terms, "No one is a
Christian except he is born of God by the anointing of the Holy
One." Carnal men cannot endure this; and then "the game begins,"
how such troublesome fellows may be put out of the way, and their
families be robbed of their possessions to enrich the persecutors.
"The holy places, vestures, gestures--the shows and outward greatness
of false religion, are in danger." Their sumptuous ceremonies,
glorious ornaments, new-fashioned carriages,1 "will fall before
the simplicity and majesty of truth." The Christian falls out with
sin at home, and then with sinful ceremonies in divine worship.
With him all that is not prescribed in the word of God is forbidden.
Sentiments like these are a blow at the root of superstition with
all its fraudful emoluments. Hence the storms of persecution which
fall on the faithful followers of Christ. Antichrist declares the
excellency of human inventions to supply what he considers defects
in God's system.

Such is the mad folly of the human heart! Dust and ashes find fault
with a system which is the perfection of wisdom, mercy, and love.
And such their infatuation, that "none must be suffered to live and
breathe that refuseth conformity thereto." Mr. Bunyan's cautions
and counsels are full of peace--"submission to the powers that
be." Pray for the persecutor--return good for his evil. He is in
the hand of God, who will soon level him with the dust, and call
his soul to solemn judgment. Although the sufferer's cause is good,
do not run yourself into trouble--Christ withdrew himself--Paul
escaped by being lowered down the city wall in a basket. If they
persecute you in one city, flee to another. "A minister can quickly
pack up and carry his religion with him, and offer what he knows
of his God to another people." God is the support of his persecuted
ones. "His power in holding up some, his wrath in leaving of
others; his making of shrubs to stand, and his suffering of cedars
to fall; his infatuating of the counsels of men, and his making
of the devil to outwit himself; his giving of his presence to his
people, and his leaving of his foes in the dark; his discovering
the uprightness of the hearts of his sanctified ones, and laying
open the hypocrisy of others, is a working of spiritual wonders
in the day of his wrath, and of the whirlwind and storm." "Alas!
we have need of these bitter pills at which we so much winch and
shuck. The physician has us in hand. May God by these try and
judge us as he judges his saints, that we may not be condemned
with the world." Such were the feelings of John Bunyan after his
long sufferings; they are the fruits of a sanctified mind. Reader,
great are our mercies--the arm of the persecutor is paralysed by
the extension of the knowledge of Christ. Still we have to pass
through taunts and revilings, and sometimes the loss of goods; but
we are saved from those awful trials through which our pilgrim
forefathers passed. May our mercies be sanctified, and may grace
be bestowed upon us in rich abundance, to enable us to pity and
forgive those sects who, in a bye-gone age, were the tools of
Satan, and whose habitations were full of cruelty.--GEO. OFFOR.



TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. BELOVED, I thought it convenient, since
many at this day are exposed to sufferings, to give my advice
touching that to thee. Namely, that thou wouldest take heed to
thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, and not suffer thyself to
be entangled in those snares that God hath suffered to be laid in
the world for some. Beware of "men" in the counsel of Christ "for
they will deliver you up" (Matt 10:17). Keep thou therefore within
the bounds of uprightness and integrity towards both God and man:
for that will fortify, that will preserve thee, if not from, yet
under the rage of men, in a comfortable and quiet frame of heart.
Wherefore do that, and that only, that will justify thy innocency,
and that will help thee, not with forced speech, but with good
conscience, when oppressed, to make thy appeals to God, and to
the consciences of all men.

This is the advice that, I thank God, I have taken myself: for I
find that there is nothing, next to God and his grace by Christ,
that can stand one in such stead, as will a good and harmless
conscience.2

I hope I can say that God has made me a Christian: and a Christian
must be a harmless man, and to that end, must embrace nothing but
harmless principles. A Christian's business, as a Christian, is
to believe in Jesus Christ, and in God the Father by him; and to
seek the good of all about him, according as his place, state and
capacity in this world will admit, not meddling with other men's
matters, but ever following that which is good. A Christian is
a child of the kingdom of God, and that kingdom, take it as it
begins in grace, or as it is perfected in glory, is not of this
world but of that which is to come: and though men of old, as some
may now, be afraid of that kingdom: yet that kingdom will hurt
no man, neither with its principles, nor by itself. To instance
somewhat, Faith in Christ: what harm can that do? A life regulated
by a moral law, what hurt is in that? Rejoicing in spirit for the
hope of the life to come by Christ, who will that harm? Nor is the
instituted worship of our Lord of any evil tendency, Christianity
teaches us also to do our enemies good, to "Bless them that hate
us, and to pray for them that despitefully use us and persecute
us," and what evil can be in that? This is the sum of the Christian
religion, as by the word may be plainly made appear: wherefore I
counsel thee to keep close to these things, and touch with nothing
that jostleth therewith.

Nor do thou marvel, thou living thus, if some should be so foolish
as to seek thy hurt, and to afflict thee, because thy works are
good (1 John 3:12,13). For there is need that thou shouldest at
sometimes be in manifold temptations, thy good and innocent life
notwithstanding (1 Peter 1:6). For, to omit other things, there
are some of the graces of God that are in thee, that as to some
of their acts, cannot shew themselves, nor their excellency, nor
their power, nor what they can do: but as thou art in a suffering
state. Faith and patience, in persecution, has that to do, that
to shew, and that to perform, that cannot be done, shewed, nor
performed any where else but there. There is also a patience of
hope; a rejoicing in hope, when we are in tribulation, that is,
over and above that which we have when we are at ease and quiet.
That also that all graces can endure, and triumph over, shall not
be known, but when, and as we are in a state of affliction. Now
these acts of our graces are of that worth and esteem with God,
also he so much delighteth in them: that occasion through his
righteous judgment, must be ministered for them to shew their
beauty, and what bravery 3 there is in them.

It is also to be considered that those acts of our graces, that
cannot be put forth, or shew themselves in their splendour, but
when we Christianly suffer, will yield such fruit to those whose
trials call them to exercise, that will, in the day of God, abound
to their comfort, and tend to their perfection in glory (1 Peter
1:7; 2 Cor 4:17).

Why then should we think that our innocent lives will exempt us
from sufferings, or that troubles shall do us such harm? For verily
it is for our present and future good that our God doth send them
upon us. I count therefore, that such things are necessary for the
health of our souls, as bodily4 pains and labour are for [the
health of] the body. People that live high, and in idleness,
bring diseases upon the body: and they that live in all fullness
of gospel-ordinances, and are not exercised with trials, grow
gross, are diseased and full of bad humours in their souls. And
though this may to some seem strange: yet our day has given us
such an experimental proof of the truth thereof, as has not been
known for some ages past.

Alas! we have need of those bitter pills, at which we so winch and
shuck:5 and it will be well if at last we be purged as we should
thereby. I am sure we are but little the better as yet, though
the physician has had us so long in hand. Some bad humours may
possibly ere long be driven out: but at present the disease is so
high, that it makes some professors fear more a consumption will
be made in their purses by these doses, than they desire to be
made better in their souls thereby. I see that I still have need
of these trials; and if God will by these judge me as he judges
his saints, that I may not be condemned with the world, I will
cry, Grace, grace for ever. The consideration also that we have
deserved these things, much6 silences me as to what may yet happen
unto me. I say, to think that we have deserved them of God, though
against men we have done nothing, makes me lay my hand upon my
mouth, and causes me to hold my tongue. Shall we deserve correction?
And be angry because we have it! Or shall it come to save us? and
shall we be offended with the hand that brings it! Our sickness
is so great that our enemies take notice of it; let them know too
that we also take our purges patiently. We are willing to pay for
those potions that are given us for the health of our body, how
sick soever they make us: and if God will have us pay too for
that which is to better our souls, why should we grudge thereat?
Those that bring us these medicines have little enough for their
pains: for my part, I profess, I would not for a great deal, be
bound, for their wages, to do their work. True, physicians are for
the most part chargeable, and the niggards are too loth to part
with their money to them: but when necessity says they must either
take physic, or die: of two evils they desire to choose the least.
Why, affliction is better than sin, and if God sends the one to
cleanse us from the other, let us thank him, and be also content
to pay the messenger.

And thou that art so loth to pay for thy sinning, and for the means
that puts thee upon that exercise of thy graces, as will be for
thy good hereafter: take heed of tempting of God lest he doubleth
this potion unto thee. The child, by eating of raw fruit, stands
in need of physic, but the child of a childish humour refuseth to
take the potion, what follows but a doubling of the affliction,
to wit, frowns, chides, and further threatenings and a forcing
of the bitter pills upon him. But let me, to persuade thee to lie
down and take thy potion, tell thee, it is of absolute necessity,
to wit, for thy spiritual and internal health. For, First, Is
it better that thou receive judgment in this world, or that thou
stay for it to be condemned with the ungodly in the next? Second,
Is it better that thou shouldest, as to some acts of thy graces,
be foreign, and a stranger, and consequently that thou shouldest
lose that far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory that is
prepared as the reward thereof? or that thou shouldest receive it
at the hand of God, when the day shall come that every man shall
have praise of him for their doings? Third, And I say again,
since chastisements are a sign of sonship, a token of love: and
the contrary a sign of bastardy, and a token of hatred (Heb 12:6-8;
Hosea 4:14). Is it not better that we bear those tokens and marks
in our flesh that bespeak us to belong to Christ, than those that
declare us to be none of his? For my part, God help me to choose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season: and God of his mercy prepare
me for his will. I am not for running myself into sufferings, but
if godliness will expose me to them, the Lord God make me more
godly still: for I believe there is a world to come. But, Christian
reader, I would not detain thee from a sight of those sheets in
thy hand: only let me beg of thee, that thou wilt not be offended
either with God, or men, if the cross is laid heavy upon thee.
Not with God, for he doth nothing without a cause, nor with men,
for they are the hand of God: and will they, nill they; 7 they are
the servants of God to thee for good (Psa 17:14; Jer 24:5). Take
therefore what comes to thee from God by them, thankfully. If the
messenger that brings it is glad that it is in his power to do thee
hurt, and to afflict thee; if he skips for joy at thy calamity:
be sorry for him; pity him, and pray to thy Father for him: he
is ignorant and understandeth not the judgment of thy God, yea he
sheweth by this his behavior, that though he, as God's ordinance,
serveth thee by afflicting of thee: yet means he nothing less than
to destroy thee: by the which also he prognosticates before thee
that he is working out his own damnation by doing of thee good.
Lay therefore the woeful state of such to heart, and render him
that which is good for his evil; and love for his hatred to thee;
then shalt thou shew that thou art acted by a spirit of holiness,
and art like thy heavenly Father. And be it so, that thy pity
and prayers can do such an one no good, yet they must light some
where, or return again, as ships come loaden from the Indies, full
of blessings into thine own bosom.

And besides all this, is there nothing in dark providences, for
the sake of the sight and observation of which, such a day may be
rendered lovely, when it is upon us? Is there nothing of God, of
his wisdom and power and goodness to be seen in thunder, and
lightning, in hailstones? in storms? and darkness and tempests?
Why then is it said, he "hath his way in the whirlwind and in the
storm" (Nahum 1:3). And why have God's servants of old made such
notes, and observed from them such excellent and wonderful things.
There is that of God to be seen in such a day as cannot be seen
in another. His power in holding up some, his wrath in leaving of
others; his making of shrubs to stand, and his suffering of cedars
to fall; his infatuating of the counsels of men, and his making
of the devil to outwit himself; his giving of his presence to his
people, and his leaving of his foes in the dark; his discovering
the uprightness of the hearts of his sanctified ones, and laying
open the hypocrisy of others, is a working of spiritual wonders
in the day of his wrath, and of the whirlwind and storm. These
days! these days are the days that do most aptly give an occasion
to Christians, of any, to take the exactest measures and scantlings
of ourselves. We are apt to overshoot, in days that are calm, and
to think ourselves far higher, and more strong than we find we be,
when the trying day is upon us. The mouth of Gaal and the boasts
of Peter were great and high before the trial came, but when that
came, they found themselves to fall far short of the courage they
thought they had (Judg 9:38). We also, before the temptation comes,
think we can walk upon the sea, but when the winds blow, we feel
ourselves begin to sink. Hence such a time is rightly said to be a
time to try us, or to find out what we are, and is there no good
in this? Is it not this that rightly rectifies our judgment about
ourselves, that makes us to know ourselves, that tends to cut off
those superfluous sprigs of pride and self-conceitedness, wherewith
we are subject to be overcome? Is not such a day, the day that
bends us, humbleth us, and that makes us bow before God, for our
faults committed in our prosperity? and yet doth it yield no good
unto us? we cold not live without such turnings of the hand of
God upon us. We should be overgrown with flesh, if we had not our
seasonable winters. It is said that in some countries trees will
grow, but will bear no fruit, because there is no winter there.
The Lord bless all seasons to his people, and help them rightly
to behave themselves, under all the times that go over them.
Farewell. I am thine to serve thee in the gospel, JOHN BUNYAN.

ADVICE TO SUFFERERS.

"WHEREFORE LET THEM THAT SUFFER ACCORDING TO THE WILL OF GOD,
COMMIT THE KEEPING OF THEIR SOULS TO HIM IN WELL DOING, AS UNTO
A FAITHFUL CREATOR"--1 PETER 4:19.

This epistle was written to saints in affliction, specially those of
the circumcision, for whom this Peter was an apostle. And it was
written to them to counsel, and comfort them in their affliction.
To counsel them as to the cause, for which they were in afflictions,
and as to the right management of themselves, and their cause,
under their affliction. To comfort them also both with respect
to their present help from God, and also with reference to the
reward that (they faithfully continuing to the end) should of
God be bestowed upon them: all which we shall have occasion, more
distinctly, to handle in this following discourse. The text is a
conclusion, drawn from the counsel and comfort which the apostle
had afore given them in their suffering state. As who should say,
my brethren, as you are now afflicted, so sufferings are needful
for you, and therefore profitable and advantageous: wherefore be
content to bear them. And that you may indeed bear them with such
Christian contentedness, and patience as becomes you; commit the
keeping of your souls to your God as unto a faithful Creator. "Let
them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping
of their souls to him [in well doing,] as unto a faithful Creator."

In this conclusion, therefore, we have three things very fit for
sufferers to concern themselves with. FIRST, A direction to a duty
of absolute necessity. SECOND, A description of the persons, who
are unto this, so necessary a duty, directed. THIRD, An insinuation
of the good effect that will certainly follow to those that after
a due manner shall take this blessed advice.

The duty so absolutely necessary is, that sufferers "commit
the keeping of their souls to God." The sufferers here intended,
are those "that suffer according to the will of God." The good
insinuated, that will be the effect of our true doing of this, is,
we shall find God "a faithful Creator." [FIRST--THE DUTY TO WHICH
SUFFERERS ARE DIRECTED.] We will first begin with the duty, that
sufferers are here directed to, namely, the committing of their
souls to God. "Let them--commit the keeping of their souls to him,
in well doing."

And I find two things in it that first call for explaining before
I proceed. 1. What we must here understand by "the soul." 2. What
by "committing" the soul to God.

1. For the first: "The soul," here, is to be taken for that most
excellent part of man, that dwelleth in the body; that immortal,
spiritual substance, that is, and will be capable of life, and
motion, of sense and reason; yea, that will abide a rational being,
when the body is returned to the dust as it was. This is that great
thing, that our Lord Jesus intends, when he bids his disciples in
a day of trial, fear him that can destroy both body and soul in
hell (Luke 12:5). That great thing, I say, that he there cautions
them to take care of. According to Peter here, "Let them commit
the keeping of their soul to him in well doing."

2. Now to "commit" this soul to God, is to carry it to him, to
lift it to him, upon my bended knees, and to pray him for the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, to take it into his holy care, and to let it
be under his keeping. Also, that he will please to deliver it from
all those snares that are laid for it, betwixt this and the next
world, and that he will see that it be forthcoming, safe and sound,
at the great and terrible judgment, notwithstanding so many have
engaged themselves against it. Thus David committed his soul to
God, when he said "Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down:
deliver my soul, O Lord, from the wicked, which is thy sword" (Psa
17:13). And again, "Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me: O Lord,
make hast to help me. Let them be ashamed and confounded together
that seek after my soul to destroy it" (Psa 40:13,14).

Thus, I have shewed you what the soul is, and what it is to commit
the soul to God. This then is the duty that the apostle here
exhorteth the sufferers to, namely, to carry their soul to God,
and leave it with him while they engage for his name in the world.
Now from the apostle's exhortation to this great duty, I will draw
these following conclusions.

Conclusion First, That when persecution is raised against a people,
there is a design laid for the ruin of those people's souls. This,
I say, doth naturally follow from the exhortation. Why else, need
they to commit the keeping of their souls to God. For by this
word, "Unto God to keep them," is suggested; there is that would
destroy them, and that therefore persecution is raised against
them. I am not so uncharitable, as to think, that persecuting
men design this. 8But I verily believe that the devil doth design
this, when he stirs them up to so sorry a work. In times of trial,
says Peter, "your adversary the devil walketh about as a roaring
lion, seeking whom he may devour" (1 Peter 5:8).

Alas! men in their acts of this nature, have designs that are
lower, and of a more inferior rank. Some of them look no higher
than revenge upon the carcass; than the spoiling of their neighbour
of his estate, liberty, or life; than the greatening of themselves
in this world, by the ruins of those that they have power to spoil.
Their "possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and
they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich" (Zech
11:5).

Ay! But Satan will not be put off thus: it is not a bag of money,
or the punishing of the carcass of such a people, that will please
or satisfy him. It is the soul that he aims at; the ruin of the
precious soul that he hath bent himself to bring to pass. It is this
therefore that Peter here hath his heart concerned with. As, who
should say, My brethren, are you troubled and persecuted for your
faith? look to it, the hand of Satan is in this thing, and whatever
men drive at by doing as they do, the devil designs no less than
the damnation of your souls. Ware hawk, saith the falconer, when
the dogs are coming near her: especially if she be too much minding
of her belly, and too forgetful of what the nature of the dog is.
Beware Christian, take heed Christian; the devil is desirous to
have thee. And who could better give this exhortation than could
Peter himself. Who for not taking heed as to this very thing, had
like by the devil to have been swallowed up alive: as is manifest
to them that heedfully read, and consider how far he was gone,
when that persecution was raised against his Master (Luke 22).
When a tyrant goes to dispossess a neighbouring prince of what is
lawfully his own: the men that he employeth at arms to overcome,
and get the land, they fight for half-crowns, and the like, and
are content with their wages: But the tyrant is for the kingdom,
nothing will serve him but the kingdom.9 This is the case: Men
when they persecute, are for the stuff, but the devil is for the
soul, nor will any thing less than that satisfy him. Let him then
that is a sufferer "commit the keeping of his soul to God:" lest
stuff, and soul, and all be lost at once.

Conclusion Second, A second conclusion that followeth upon these
words, is this: That sufferers, if they have not a care, may be
too negligent as to the securing of their souls with God, even
when persecution is upon them. For these words, as they are an
instruction, so they are an awakening instruction; they call as to
people in danger; as to people, not so aware of the danger; or as
unto a people that forget, too much, that their souls, and the ruin
of them, are sought after by Satan, when trouble attends them for
the gospel sake. As, who should say, when troubles are upon you
for the gospel's sake, then take heed that you forget not to commit
your souls to the keeping of God. We are naturally apt with that
good man Gideon, to be threshing out our wheat, that we may hide
it from the Midianites (Judg 6:11). But we are not so naturally apt
to be busying ourselves to secure our souls with God. The reason
is, for that we are more flesh than spirit, and because the voice
of the world makes a bigger sound in our carnal mind, than the word
of God doth. Wherefore Peter, here, calls upon us as upon men of
forgetful minds, saying, Let them that suffer according to the
will of God, have a care of their souls, and take heed, that the
fears of the loss of a little of this world, do not make them
forget the fear of the losing of their souls. That sufferers are
subject to this, may appear by the stir and bustle that at such
a time they make to lock all up safe that the hand of man can
reach,10 while they are cold, chill, remiss, and too indifferent
about the committing of their soul to God to keep it. This is seen
also, in that many, in a time of trouble for their profession,
will study more to deceive themselves by a change of notions, by
labouring to persuade their consciences to admit them to walk more
at large, by hearkening to opinions that please and gratify the
flesh, by adhering to bad examples, and taking evil counsels, than
they will to make straight steps for their feet: and to commit
the keeping of their souls to God. What shall I say, have there
not been many, that so long as peace has lasted, have been great
swaggerers for religion, who yet so soon as the sun has waxed
warm, have flagged, have been discontented, offended, and turned
away from him that speaketh from heaven? All which is because men
are naturally apt to be more concerned for their goods, carnal
peace, and a temporal life, than they are about securing of their
souls with God. Wherefore I say, these words are spoken to awaken
us to the consideration of soul-concerns, and how that should be
safely lodged under the care, protection, and mercy of God, by
our committing of it to him, for that purpose, by Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Conclusion Third, Another conclusion that followeth upon this
exhortation, is this: That persecution doth, sometimes, so hotly
follow God's people, as to leave them nothing but a soul to care
for. They have had no house, no land, no money, no goods, no life,
no liberty, left them to care for. ALL IS GONE BUT THE SOUL.
Goods have been confiscated, liberty has been in irons, the life
condemned, the neck in a halter, or the body in the fire. So then
all, to such, has been gone, and they have had nothing left them
to care for, but their soul. "Let them commit the keeping of their
soul to God." This conclusion, I say, doth naturally flow from
the words. For that the apostle here doth make mention only of
the soul, as of that which is left, as of that which yet remains
to the sufferer of all that ever he had. Thus they served Christ;
they left him nothing but his soul to care for. Thus they served
Stephen; they left him nothing but his soul to care for, and they
both cared for that, "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit,"
said Jesus (Luke 23:46). And, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit,"
said Stephen (Acts 7:59). As for all other things, they were gone.
They parted the very clothes of Christ among themselves before his
face, even while he did hang pouring out his life before them,
upon the tree. "They parted my garments among them," said he,
"and upon my vesture did they cast lots" (Matt 27:35; Mark 15:24;
John 19:24). This also has oftentimes been the condition of later
Christians, all has been gone, they have been stripped of all,
nothing has been left them but "soul" to care for. Job said that he
had escaped with the skin of his teeth; and that is but a little:
but he doth not escape with so much, that loses all that he has,
life and all, we now except the soul. But,

Conclusion Fourth, Another thing that followeth from the words is
this; namely, That when the devil and wicked men have done what
they could, in their persecuting of the godly; they have yet had
their souls at their own dispose. 11 They have not been able to
rob them of their souls, they are not able to hurt their souls.
The soul is not in their power to touch, without the leave of God,
and of him whose soul it is. "And fear not them," saith Christ,
"which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul" (Matt
10:28). This, I say, lies clear also in the text; for the exhortation
supposes, that whatever the sufferers, there made mention of, had
lost, they had yet their souls at their own dispose. Let them that
suffer, even to the loss of goods, liberty, or life, "commit the
keeping of their souls to God." As, who should say, though the
enemy hath reached them to their all, and stripped them of their
all, yet I know, that their soul is not among that all: For their
soul is yet free from them, at liberty, and may be disposed of,
even as the sufferer will. Wherefore, let him commit the keeping
of his soul to God, lest he also through his negligence or
carelessness be also spoiled of that. The sufferer, therefore,
hath his soul at his own dispose, he may give that away to God
Almighty, in spite of all that the devil and the world can do. He
may, indeed, see men parting his land, his household stuff, yea,
his very raiment among themselves, but they cannot so dispose of
his soul.12 They "have no more that they can do" (Luke 12:4).

Conclusion Fifth, Another conclusion that followeth from these
words is this, That a man, when he is a sufferer, is not able to
secure his own soul from the hand of hell by any other means, but
by the committing of the keeping thereof to God. Do you suffer?
Are you in affliction for your profession? Then keep not your
soul in your own hand, for fear of losing that with the rest. For
no man "can keep alive his own soul" (Psa 22:29). No, not in the
greatest calm; no, not when the lion is asleep: how then should
he do it at such a time, when the horrible blast of the terrible
ones shall beat against his wall. The consideration of this was
that that made holy Paul, who was a man upon whom persecution
continually attended, commit his soul to God (Acts 20:22-24; 2 Tim
1:12). God, as I shall shew you by and by, is he, and he alone
that is able to keep the soul, and deliver it from danger. Man
is naturally a self-deceiver, and therefore is not to be trusted,
any farther than as the watchful eye of God is over him. But as
to his soul, he is not to be trusted with that at all, that must
be wholly committed to God, left altogether with him; laid at
his feet, and he also must take the charge thereof, or else it is
gone, will be lost, and will perish for ever and ever. Wherefore
it is a dangerous thing for a man that is a sufferer, to be a senseless
man, as to the danger that his soul is in, and a prayerless man,
as to the committing of the keeping of it to God. For he that
is such, has yet his soul, and the keeping thereof, in his own
deceitful hand. And so has he also that stays himself upon his
friends, upon his knowledge, the promise of men, or the mercy of
his enemies, or that has set in his mind a bound to himself, how
far he will venture for religion, and where he will stop. This
is the man that makes not God his trust, and that therefore will
surely fall in the day of his temptation. Satan, who now hunteth
for the precious soul to destroy it, has power, as well as policy,
beyond what man can think. He has power to blind, harden, and to
make insensible, the heart. He also can make truth in the eyes of
the suffering man, a poor, little, and insignificant thing. Judas
had not committed the keeping of his soul to God, but abode in
himself, and was left in his tabernacle: and you by and by see
what a worthy price he set upon himself, his Christ, and heaven,
and all. All to him was not now worth thirty pieces of silver.

And as he can make truth in thy esteem to be little, so he can make
sufferings great, and ten times more terrible, than he that hath
committed the keeping of his soul to God shall ever find them.
A jail shall look as black as hell, and the loss of a few stools
and chairs, as bad as the loss of so many bags of gold. 13 Death
for the Saviour of the world, shall seem to be a thing both
unreasonable and intolerable. Such will choose to run the hazard
of the loss of a thousand souls, in the way of the world, rather
than the loss of one poor, sorry, transitory life for the holy
Word of God. But the reason, as I said, is, they have not committed
the keeping of their soul to God. For he that indeed has committed
the keeping of his soul to that great one, has shaken his hands of
all things here. Has bid adieu to the world, to friends, and life:
and waiteth upon God in a way of close keeping to his truth, and
walking in his ways, having counted the cost, and been persuaded
to take what cup God shall suffer the world to give him for so
doing.

Conclusion Sixth, Another conclusion that followeth from these
words, is, That God is very willing to take the charge and care
of the soul (that is committed unto him) of them that suffer for
his sake in the world. If this were not true, the exhortation
would not answer the end. What is intended by, "Let him commit the
keeping of his soul to God," but that the sufferer should indeed
leave that great care with him; but if God be not willing to
be concerned with such a charge, what bottom14 is there for the
exhortation? But the exhortation has this for its bottom, therefore
God is willing to take the charge and care of the soul of him
that suffereth for his name in this world. "The Lord redeemeth the
soul of his servants: and none of them that trust in him shall
be desolate" (Psa 34:22; 1 Sam 25:28,29). None, not one that
committeth his soul to God's keeping in a way of well doing, but
shall find him willing to be concerned therewith. Ay, this, saith
the sufferer, if I could believe this, it would rid me of all my
fears. But I find myself engaged for God, for I have made a profession
of his name, and cannot arrive to this belief that God is willing
to take the charge and care of my soul. Wherefore I fear, that if
trials come so high, as that life, as well as estate, must go, that
both life, and estate, and soul, and all will be lost at once.

Well, honest heart, these are thy fears, but let them fly away, and
consider the text again, "Let them that suffer according to the
will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to him,--as unto
a faithful Creator." These are God's words, Christ's words, and
the invitation of the Holy Ghost. When, therefore, thou readest
them, be persuaded that thou hearest the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, all of them jointly and severally speaking to thee
and saying, Poor sinner, thou art engaged for God in the world,
thou art suffering for his Word: leave thy soul with him as with
one that is more willing to save it, than thou art willing he
should: act faith, trust God, believe his Word, and go on in thy
way of witness-bearing for him, and thou shalt find all well, and
according to the desire of thy heart at last. True, Satan will
make it his business to tempt thee to doubt of this, that thy way
be made yet more hard and difficult to thee. For he knows that
unbelief is a soul-perplexing sin, and makes that which would
otherwise be light, pleasant, and easy, unutterably heavy and
burdensome to the sufferer. Yea, this he doth in hope to make
thee at last, to cast away thy profession, thy cause, thy faith,
thy conscience, thy soul, and all. But hear what the Holy Ghost
saith again: "He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save
the souls of the needy. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and
violence: and precious shall their blood be in his sight" (Psa
72:13,14). These words also are spoken for the comfort of sufferers,
ver. 12. "For he shall deliver the needy when he crieth; the poor
also, and him that hath no helper." Wherefore, let them that are
God's sufferers, pluck up a good heart; let them not be afraid to
trust God with their souls, and with their eternal concerns. Let
them cast all their care upon God, for he careth for them (1 Peter
5:7).

But I am in the dark.

I answer, never stick at that. It is most bravely done, to trust
God with my soul in the dark, and to resolve to serve God for
nothing, rather than give out. Not to see, and yet to believe, and
to be a follower of the Lamb, and yet to be at uncertainty, what
we shall have at last, argues love, fear, faith, and an honest
mind, and gives the greatest sign of one that hath true sincerity
in his soul. It was this that made Job and Peter so famous, and
the want of it that took away much of the glory of the faith of
Thomas (Job 1:8-10,21; Matt 19:27; John 20:29). Wherefore believe,
verily, that God is ready, willing, yea, that he looks for, and
expects that thou who art a sufferer shouldest commit the keeping
of thy soul to him, as unto a faithful Creator.

Conclusion Seventh. Another conclusion that followeth from these
words is this, namely, That God is able, as well as willing, to
secure the souls of his suffering saints, and to save them from
the evil of all their trials, be they never so many, divers, or
terrible. "Let him commit the keeping of his soul to God," but to
what boot, if he be not able to keep it in his hand, and from the
power of him that seeks the soul to destroy it? But "my Father
which gave them me," saith Christ, "is greater than all; and no
man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand" (John 10:29).
So then there can be no sorrow, affliction, or misery invented,
by which the devil may so strongly prevail, as thereby to pluck
the soul out of the hand of him who has received it, to keep it
from falling, and perishing thereby. The text therefore supposeth
a sufficiency of power in God to support, and a sufficiency of
comfort and goodness to embolden the soul to endure for him: let
Satan break out, and his instruments too, to the greatest degree
of their rage and cruelty.

1. There is in God a sufficiency of power to keep them that have
laid their soul at his foot to be preserved. And hence he is called
the soul-keeper, the soul-preserver, (Prov 24:12) "The Lord is thy
keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The sun shall
not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. The Lord shall
preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul" (Psa
121:5-7). "The sun shall not smite thee": that is, persecution
shall not dry and wither thee away to nothing (Matt 13:6,21). But
that notwithstanding, thou shalt be kept and preserved, carried
through and delivered from all evil. Let him therefore commit the
keeping of his soul to him, if he is in a suffering condition,
that would have it secured and found safe and sound at last. For,

(1.) Then thine own natural weakness, and timorousness shall not
overcome thee.--For it shall not be too hard for God. God can
make the most soft spirited man as hard as an adamant, harder than
flint, yea harder than the northern steel. "Shall iron break the
northern iron and the steel?" (Jer 15:12). The sword of him is
[used] in vain that lays at a Christian, when he is in the way of
his duty to God: if God has taken to him the charge and care of
his soul, he can shoe him with brass, and make his hoofs of iron
(Deut 33:25). "He can strengthen the spoiled against the strong,
so that the spoiled shall come against the fortress" (Amos 5:8;
Eze 13:9).

He can turn thee into another man, and make thee that which thou
never wast. Timorous Peter, fearful Peter, he could make as bold
as a lion. He that at one time was afraid of a sorry girl, he could
make at another to stand boldly before the council (Matt 26; Acts
4:13). There is nothing too hard for God. He can say to them that
are of a fearful heart, "Be strong, fear not" (Isa 35:4). He can
say, Let the weak say I am strong; by such a word, by which he
created the world (Zech 12:8).

(2.) Thine own natural darkness and ignorance shall not cause thee
to fall; thy want of wit he can supply.--He can say to the fools,
be wise; not only by way of correction, but also by way of
instruction too. He "hath chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise;--yea, things which are despised,--and things
which are not, hath God chosen to bring to nought things that are"
(1 Cor 1:27,28). Wisdom and might are his: and when, and where
he will work, none can at all withstand him. He can give thee the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of his Son (Eph
1:17). Yea, to do this, is that which he challengeth, as that
which is peculiar to himself. "Who hath put wisdom in the inward
parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart?" (Job 38:36).
And that he will do this that he hath promised, yea, promised to
do it to that degree, as to make his, that shall be thus concerned
for him, to top, and overtop all men that shall them oppose. I, saith
he, "will give you a mouth and wisdom, that all your adversaries
shall not be able to gainsay nor resist" (Luke 21:15).

(3.) Thine own doubts and mistrusts about what he will do, and about
whither thou shalt go, when thou for him hast suffered awhile, he
can resolve, yea, dissolve, crush, and bring to nothing.--He can
make fear flee far away: and place heavenly confidence in its room.
He can bring invisible and eternal things to the eye of thy soul,
and make thee see that in those things in which thine enemies shall
see nothing, that thou shalt count worth the loss of ten thousand
lives to enjoy. He can pull such things out of his bosom, and
can put such things into thy mouth; yea, can make thee choose to
be gone, though through the flames, than to stay here and die in
silken sheets. Yea, he can himself come near and bring his heaven
and glory to thee. The Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon
them that are but reproached for the name of Christ (1 Peter 4:14).
And what the Spirit of glory is, and what is his resting upon his
sufferers, is quite beyond the knowledge of the world, and is but
little felt by saints at peace. They be they that are engaged,
and that are under the lash of Christ; they are they, I say, that
have it and that understand something of it.

When Moses went up the first time into the mount to God, the people
reproached him for staying with him so long, saying, "As for this
Moses,--we wot not what is become of him" (Exo 32:1). Well, the
next time he went up thither, and came down, the Spirit of glory
was upon him; his face shone, though he wist it not, to his honour,
and their amazement (Exo 34:29-35). Also while Stephen stood before
the council to be accused, by suborned men, "All that sat in the
council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face as it had been
the face of an angel" (Acts 6:15). Those that honour God, he will
honour, yea, will put some of his glory upon them, but they shall
be honoured. There is none can tell what God can do. He can make
those things that in themselves are most fearful and terrible
to behold, the most pleasant, delightful, and desirable things.
He can make a jail more beautiful than a palace; restraint, more
sweet by far than liberty. And "the reproach of Christ greater
riches than the treasures in Egypt" (Heb 11:26). It is said of
Christ, That "for the joy that was set before him, he endured the
cross, despising the shame" (Heb 12:2). But,

2. As there is in God a sufficiency of power to uphold, so there
is in him also a sufficiency of comfort and goodness to embolden
us: I mean communicative comfort and goodness. Variety of, and
the terribleness that attends afflictions, call, not only for the
beholding of things, but also a laying hold of them by faith and
feeling; now this also is with God to the making of HIS to sing in
the night. Paul and Silas sang in prison, the apostles went away
from the council rejoicing, when they had shamefully beaten them for
their preaching in the temple (Acts 5). But whence came this but
from an inward feeling by faith of the love of God, and of Christ,
which passeth knowledge? Hence he says to those under afflictions,
"Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer" (Rev 2:10).
There are things to be suffered, as well as places to suffer in;
and there are things to be let into the soul for its emboldening,
as well as things to be showed to it (Rom 5:5).

Now the things to be suffered are many, some of which are thus counted
up: "They were tortured,--had cruel mockings and scourgings;--they
were stoned, were sawn asunder, were slain with the sword,--were
tempted;--they wandered about in sheep-skins, and goat-skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented" (Heb 11:35-37). These are
some of the things that good men of old have suffered for their
profession of the name of Jesus Christ. All which they were enabled
by him to bear, to bear with patience; to bear with rejoicing;
"knowing in themselves that they had in heaven a better, and an
enduring substance" (Heb 10:32-34). And it is upon this account
that Paul doth call to mind the most dreadful of his afflictions,
which he suffered for the gospel sake with rejoicing; and that he
tells us that he was most glad, when he was in such infirmities.
Yea, it is upon this account that he boasteth, and vaunteth it
over death, life, angels, principalities, powers, things present,
things to come, height, depth, and every other creature: for he
knew that there was enough in that love of God, which was set on
him through Christ, to preserve him, and to carry him through all
(2 Cor 12:9,10; Rom 8:37-39). That God has done thus, a thousand
instances might be given; and that God will still do thus, for
that we have his faithful promise (Isa 43:2; 1 Cor 10:13).

To the adversaries of the church these things have also sometimes
been shewed, to their amazement and confusion. God shewed to the
king of Babylon that he was with the three children in the fiery
furnace (Dan 3:24). God shewed to the king of Babylon again, that
he would be where HIS were, though in the lion's den (6:24).

Also, in later days, whoso reads Mr. Fox's Acts and Monuments, will
also find several things to confirm this for truth. God has power
over all plagues, and therefore can either heighten, or moderate
and lessen them at pleasure. He has power over fire, and can take
away the intolerable heat thereof. This those in the Marian days
could also testify, namely, Hauks and Bainham, and others, who
could shout for joy, and clap their hands in the very flames for
joy. God has power over hunger, and can moderate it, and cause
that one meal's meat shall go as far as forty were wont to do.
This is witness in Elias, when he went for his life to the mount
of God, being fled from the face of Jezebel (1 Kings 19:8). And
what a good night's lodging had Jacob when he fled from the face
of his brother Esau: when the earth was his couch, the stone15
his pillow, the heavens his canopy, and the shades of the night
his curtains16 (Gen 27:12-16).

I can do all things, said Paul, through Christ strengthening
me. And again, I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake. But
how can that be, since no affliction for the present seems joyous?
I answer, though they be not so in themselves, yet Christ, by
his presence, can make them so: for then his power rests upon us.
When I am weak, saith he, then I am strong; then Christ doth in
me mighty things: for my strength, saith Christ, is made perfect
in weakness; in affliction, for the gospel sake.

For when my people are afflicted and suffer great distress for
me, then they have my comforting, supporting, emboldening, and
upholding presence to relieve them: an instance of which you have
in the three children and in Daniel, made mention of before. But
what, think you, did these servants of the God of Jacob feel, feel
in their souls, of his power and comforting presence when they,
for his name, were suffering of the rage of their enemies,--while,
also, one, like the Son of God, was walking in the fire with the
three; and while Daniel sat and saw that the hands of the angels
were made muzzles for the lions' mouths.

I say, was it not worth being in the furnace and in the den to see
such things as these? O! the grace of God, and his Spirit and power
that is with them that suffer for him, if their hearts be upright
with him; if they are willing to be faithful to him; if they have
learned to say, here am I, whenever he calls them, and whatever
he calls them to. "Wherefore," when Peter saith, "let them that
suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator." He concludes,
that how outrageous, furious, merciless, or cruel soever the enemy
is, yet there, with him, they shall find help and succour, relief
and comfort; for God is able to make such as do so, stand.

Conclusion Eighth. We will now come to touch upon that which may
more immediately be called the reason of this exhortation; for,
although all these things that have been mentioned before may, or
might be called reasons of the point, yet there are those, in my
judgment, that may be called reasons, which are yet behind. As,

1. Because, when a man has, by faith and prayer, committed the
keeping of his soul to God, he has the advantage of that liberty
of soul to do and suffer for God that he cannot otherwise have. He
that has committed his soul to God to keep is rid of that care,
and is delivered from the fear of its perishing for ever. When
the Jews went to stone Stephen they laid their clothes down at
a distance from the place, at a young man's feet, whose name was
Saul, that they might not be a cumber or a trouble to them, as to
their intended work. So we, when we go about to drive sin out of
the world, in a way of suffering for God's truth against it,17 we
should lay down our souls at the feet of God to care for, that we
may not be cumbered with the care of them ourselves; also, that
our care of God's truth may not be weakened by such sudden and
strong doubts as will cause us faintingly to say, But what will
become of my soul? When Paul had told his son Timothy that he had
been before that lion Nero, and that he was at present delivered
out of his mouth, he adds, And the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom.
He shall and will. Here is a man at liberty, here are no cumbersome
fears. But how came the apostle by this confidence of his well-being
and of his share in another world? Why, "he had committed the
keeping of his soul to God," compare 2 Timothy 1:12 with 4:18. For
to commit the keeping of the soul to God, if it be done in faith
and prayer, it leaves, or rather brings this holy boldness and
confidence into the soul.

Suppose a man in the country were necessitated to go to London,
and had a great charge of money to pay in there; suppose, also,
that the way thither was become exceeding dangerous because of the
highwaymen that continually abide therein,--what now must this
man do to go on his journey cheerfully? Why, let him pay in his
money to such an one in the country as will be sure to return it
for him at London safely. Why, this is the case, thou art bound for
heaven, but the way thither is dangerous. It is beset everywhere
with evil angels, who would rob thee of thy soul, What now? Why,
if thou wouldest go cheerfully on in thy dangerous journey, commit
thy treasure, thy soul, to God to keep; and then thou mayest say,
with comfort, Well, that care is over: for whatever I meet with in
my way thither, my soul is safe enough: the thieves, if they meet
me, can not come at that; I know to whom I have committed my soul,
and I am persuaded that he will keep that to my joy and everlasting
comfort against the great day.18

This, therefore, is one reason why we should, that suffer for
Christ, commit the keeping of our souls to God; because a doubt
about the well-being of that will be a clog, a burden, and an
affliction to our spirit: yea, the greatest of afflictions, whilst
we are taking up our cross and bearing it after Christ. The joy of
the Lord is our strength, and the fear of perishing is that which
will be weakening to us in the way.

2. We should commit the keeping of our souls to God, because the
final conclusion that merciless men do sometimes make with the
servants of God is all on a sudden. They give no warning before
they strike. We shall not need here to call you to mind about the
massacres that were in Ireland, Paris, Piedmont, and other places,
where the godly, in the night before they were well awake, had,
some of them, their heart blood running on the ground. The savage
monsters crying out, Kill, kill, from one end of a street or a
place to the other. This was sudden; and he that had not committed
his soul to God to keep it was surely very hard put to it now;
but he that had done so was ready for such sudden work. Sometimes,
indeed, the axe, and halter, or the faggot is shewed first; but
sometimes, again, it is without that warning. Up, said Saul to Doeg,
the Edomite, and slay the priests of the Lord (1 Sam 22:11,18,19).
Here was sudden work: fall on, said Saul, and Doeg fell upon them,
"and slew on that day four score and five persons that did wear a
linen ephod." "Nob, also, the city of the priests, smote he with
the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings,"
&c. Here was but a word and a blow. Thinkest thou not, who readest
these lines, that all of these who had before committed their soul
to God to keep were the fittest folk to die?

"And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his
head to be brought" (Mark 6:27). The story is concerning Herod
and John the Baptist: Herod's dancing girl had begged John the
Baptist's head, and nothing but his head must serve her turn;
well, girl, thou shalt have it. Have it? Ay, but it will be long
first. No; thou shalt have it now, just now, immediately. "And
immediately he sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be
brought."

Here is sudden work for sufferers; here is no intimation beforehand.
The executioner comes to John; now, whether he was at dinner, or
asleep, or whatever he was about, the bloody man bolts in upon
him, and the first word he salutes him with is, Sir, strip, lay
down your neck, for I am come to take away your head. But hold,
stay; wherefore? pray, let me commit my soul to God. No, I must not
stay; I am in haste: slap, says his sword, and off falls the good
man's head. This is sudden work; work that stays for no man; work
that must be done by and by; immediately, or it is not worth a
rush. I will, said she, that thou give me, by and by, in a charger,
the head of John the Baptist. Yea, she came in haste, and hastily
the commandment went forth, and immediately his head was brought.

3. Unless a man commits the keeping of his soul to God, it is a
question whether he can hold out and stand his ground, and wrestle
with all temptations. "This is the victory,--even our faith"; and
"who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth?" And
what encouragement has a man to suffer for Christ, whose heart
cannot believe, and whose soul he cannot commit to God to keep
it? And our Lord Jesus intimates as much when he saith, "Be thou
faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of life." Wherefore
saith he thus? but to encourage those that suffer for his truth
in the world, to commit the keeping of their souls to him, and
to believe that he hath taken the charge and care of them. Paul's
wisdom was, that he was ready to die before his enemies were ready
to kill him. "I am now ready," saith he, "to be offered and the
time of my departure is at hand" (2 Tim 4:6).

This is, therefore, a thing of high concern; to wit, the committing
of the soul to God to keep it. It is, I say, of concern to do it
now, just now, quickly, whether thou art yet engaged or no; for
it is a good preparatory to, as well as profitable in, a time of
persecution: consider it, I say. The apostle Paul saith that he
and his companions were bold in their God, to profess and stand
to the word of God (1 Thess 2:2). But how could that be if they
had the salvation of their souls to seek, and that to be sure
they would have had, had they not committed the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing?

Quest. But what is committing of the soul to God?

Answ. I have, in general, briefly spoken to that already, and now,
for thy further help, we will a little enlarge. Wherefore,

(1.) To commit is to deliver up to custody to be kept. Hence
prisoners, when sent to the jail, are said to be committed thither.
Thus Paul, "haling men and women, committing them to prison"
(Acts 8:3). And thus Joseph's master committed all his prisoners
to him, to his custody, to be kept there according to the law (Gen
39:22).

(2.) To commit, is not only to deliver up to custody, but to give
in charge; that that which is committed be kept safe, and not suffered
to be lost (Luke 16:11). Thus Paul was committed to prison, the
jailor being charged to keep him safely (Acts 16:23).

(3.) To commit, is to leave the whole disposal, sometimes, of that
which is committed to those to whom such thing is committed. Thus
were the shields of the temple committed to the guard (1 Kings
14:27) And Jeremiah to the hands of Gedaliah (Jer 39:14).

And thus thou must commit thy soul to God and to his care and
keeping. It must be delivered up to his care and put under his
custody. Thou mayest also, though I would speak modestly, give
him a charge to take the care of it. "Concerning my sons [and
concerning my daughters] and concerning the work of my hands, command
ye me" (Isa 45:11). Thou must also leave all the concerns of thy
soul and of thy being an inheritor of the next world wholly to
the care of God. He that doth this in the way that God has bid him
is safe, though the sky should fall. "The poor committeth himself
unto thee, thou art the helper of the fatherless" (Psa 10:14).

And for encouragement to do this, the Lord has bidden us, the
Lord has commanded us, the Lord expecteth that we should thus do.
Yea, thou art also bidden to commit thy way unto him (Psa 37:5).
Thy work unto him (Prov 16:3). Thy cause unto him (Job 5:8). Thy
soul to him, and he will take care of all. And if we do this, as
we should, God will not only take care of us and of our souls in
the general, but that our work and ways be so ordered that we may
not fail in either. "I have trusted," said David, "in the Lord,
therefore I shall not slide" (Psa 26:1).

Before I leave this, I will speak something of the way in which
this commitment of the soul to God must be; and that is, "in a way
of well-doing." Let them commit the keeping of their souls to him
"in well-doing"; or, in a way of well-doing. That is, therefore,
the course that a godly man should be found in, at, in, and after
he hath committed his soul to God to keep. And, as the apostle
says in another place, this is but a "reasonable service" (Rom
12:1). For if God be so gracious as to take care of my soul at my
request, why should not I also be so gracious as to be found in
a way of well-doing at his bidding? Take care, master, of me for
meat and wages, and I will take care, master, that thy work shall
be faithfully done. This is honest, and thus should Christians
say to God: and he that heartily, in this, shall mean as he saith,
shall find that God's ways shall be strength unto him.

A Christian is not to commit his soul unto God to keep, and so to
grow remiss, carnal, negligent, cold, and worldly; concluding as
if he had now bound God to save him, but sets himself at liberty
whether he will longer serve him in trying and troublesome times
or no. He must commit the keeping of his soul to him "in well-doing."
He may not now relinquish God's cause, play the apostate, cast
off the cross, and look for heaven notwithstanding. He that doth
thus will find himself mistaken, and be made to know at last that
God takes the care of no such souls. "If any man draws back," saith
he, "my soul shall have no pleasure in him." Wherefore, he that
committeth the keeping of his soul to God must do it in that way
which God has prescribed to him, which is in a way of well-doing.
Alas! alas! there is never such a word in it; it must be done in
a way of "well-doing." You must think of this that would commit
your souls to God in suffering and troublesome times. You must do
it in well-doing.

"In well-doing," that is, in persevering in ways of godliness,
both with respect to morals and also instituted worship. Thou,
therefore, that wouldest have God take care of thy soul, as thou
believest, so thou must do well; that is, do good to the poor, to
thy neighbour, to all men, especially to the household of faith.
Benjamin must have a Benjamin's mess; and all others, as thou art
capable, must feel and find the fruit of thy godliness. Thou must
thus serve the Lord with much humility of mind, though through
many difficulties and much temptation.

Thou must also keep close to gospel worship, public and private;
doing of those things that thou hast warrant for from the word,
and leaving of that or those things for others that will stick
to them--that have no stamp of God upon them. Thou must be found
doing of all with all thy heart, and if thou sufferest for so
doing, thou must bear it patiently. For what Peter saith to the
women he spake to, may be applied to all believers, "whose daughters
ye are," saith he, meaning Sarah's, "as long as ye do well, and
are not afraid with any amazement" (1 Peter 3:6).

So then, the man that has committed his soul to God to keep has
not at all disengaged himself from his duty, or took himself off
from a perseverance in that good work that, under a suffering
condition, he was bound to do before. No; his very committing of
his soul to God to keep it has laid an engagement upon him to abide
to God in that calling wherein he is called of God. To commit my
soul to God, supposes my sensibleness of hazard and danger; but
there is none [no danger] among men when the offence of the cross
is ceased. To commit my soul to God to keep, concludes my resolution
to go on in that good way of God that is so dangerous to my soul,
if God taketh not the charge and care thereof. For he that saith
in his heart, I will now commit my soul to God, if he knows what
he says, says thus: I am for holding on in a way of bearing of
my cross after Christ, though I come to the same end for so doing
as he came to before me. This is committing the soul to him in
well-doing. Look to yourselves, therefore, whoever you are that
talk of leaving your souls with God, but do live loose, idle,
profane, and wicked lives. God will not take care of such men's
souls; they commit them not unto him as they should. They do but
flatter him with their lips and lie unto him with their tongue,
and think to deceive the Lord; but to no purpose. "He that soweth
to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption." It is he that
sows to the Spirit that shall "reap life everlasting" (Gal 6:7,8).

[SECOND--A DESCRIPTION OF THE PERSONS WHO ARE DIRECTED TO COMMIT
THE KEEPING OF THEIR SOULS TO GOD.]

I shall now come to the second thing contained in the text, namely,
to give you a more distinct description of the men that are thus
bid to commit the keeping of their souls to God. And they are thus
described: they that "suffer according to the will of God." "Let
them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping
of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator."

Two things are here to be inquired into. FIRST, What the apostle
here means by the will of God. SECOND, What suffering according
to the will of God is.

FIRST, For the will of God, it is divers ways taken in the scriptures;
as, sometimes, for electing, justifying, sanctifying acts of God;
sometimes for faith, good life, and sometimes for suffering for
his name (Rom 9; Eph 1:11; John 7:17; 1 John 3:23; 1 Thess 4:3;
Matt 7:21). But, by will of God here we must, First, Understand
HIS LAW AND TESTAMENT. Second, HIS ORDER AND DESIGNMENT.

[THE WILL OF GOD MEANS HIS LAW AND TESTAMENT.]

First, By his will I understand his law and testament. This
is called the revealed will of God, or that by which he has made
himself, and how he will be worshiped, known unto the children
of men. Now, I, understanding these words thus, must, before I go
further, make this distinction, to wit, that there is a difference
to be put betwixt them that suffer for the breach and those that
suffer for keeping of this law and testament; for though both of
them may suffer by the will of God, yet they are not both concerned
in this text. A malefactor that suffereth for his evil deeds the
due punishment thereof, suffereth, as other texts declare, according
to the will of God. But, I say, this text doth not concern itself
with them; for both this text and this epistle is writ for the
counsel and comfort of those that suffer for keeping the law and
testament of God; that suffer for well-doing (1 Peter 3:13,14,17;
4:13,14).

The man then that is concerned in this advice is he that suffereth
from the hands of men for keeping of the word of God; and this is
he that has licence, leave, yea, a command to commit the keeping
of his soul to God in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. We
will a little enlarge upon this.

[What it is to suffer according to the will of God, or his law and
testament.]

He that keepeth the word of God is such an one that has regard to
both the matter and manner thereof. The matter is the truth, the
doctrine contained therein; the manner is that comely, godly,
humble, faithful way of doing it which becomes a man that has to
do with the law and testament of God; and both these are contained
in the text. For, first, here is the will of God to be done; and
then, secondly, to be done according to his will. "Let them that
suffer according to his will": which words, I say, take in both
matter and manner of doing. So then, the man that here we have
to do with, and to discourse of, is a man that, in the sense now
given, suffereth. That which makes a martyr, is suffering for the
word of God after a right manner; and that is, when he suffereth,
not only for righteousness, but for righteousness' sake; not only
for truth, but of love to truth; not only for God's word, but
according to it, to wit, in that holy, humble, meek manner as the
word of God requireth. A man may give his body to be burned for
God's truth, and yet be none of God's martyrs (1 Cor 13:1-3). Yea,
a man may suffer with a great deal of patience, and yet be none
of God's martyrs (1 Peter 2:20). The one, because he wanteth that
grace that should poise his heart, and make him right in the manner
of doing; the other, because he wanteth that word of the Holy One
that alone can make his cause good, as to matter. It is, therefore,
matter and manner that makes the martyr; and it is this man that
is intended in the text which is aforesaid described. So then,
they that suffer for the law and testament of God in that holy
and humble manner that the Word requires, they are they that, by
this Word of God, are commanded to commit the keeping of their
souls to God.

From this consideration, two things present themselves to our
sight. 1. That a man may be a Christian, and suffer, and yet not
suffer, in the sense last given, according to the will of God. 2.
There have been, and may yet be a people in the world that have,
and may suffer in the sense of the apostle here, according to the
will of God.

[1. A Christian may suffer, but not in the sense of the apostle,
according to the will of God.]

A few words to the first of these, namely, that a man may be
a Christian, and suffer, and yet not suffer, in the sense of the
apostle in the text, "according to the will of God." He may be
a Christian and yet not suffer as a Christian. He may want the
matter, or, he may want the manner, of suffering as a Christian.

This is evident from what this apostle suggests in several places
of this epistle. For,

Saith he, "If ye be buffeted for your faults" (1 Peter 2:20). This
supposeth that a Christian may so be; for he speaketh here to the
same people, unto whom he speaketh in the text, though he putteth
them not under the same circumstance, as suffering for well-doing.
If ye be buffeted for your faults, for what God's word calls
faults, what thank have you from God, or good men, though you take
it patiently?

So again, "For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer
for well-doing, than for evil-doing" (1 Peter 3:17). Here it is
plainly supposed that a Christian man may suffer for evil-doing, yea,
that the will of God may be, that he should suffer for evil-doing.
For God, if Christians do not well, will vindicate himself by
punishing of them for their doing ill. Yea, and will not count
them worthy, though they be his own, to be put among the number
of those that suffer for doing well.

Again, "But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or
as an evildoer, or as a busybody in other men's matters" (1 Peter
4:15). These are cautions to Christians to persuade them to take
heed to themselves, their tongues and their actions, that all
be kept within the bounds of the Word. For it would be a foolish
thing to say, that these are cautions to persuade to take heed of
that, into which it is not possible one should fall. It is possible
for Christians to suffer for evil-doing, and therefore let Christians
beware; it is possible for Christians to be brought to public
justice for their faults, and therefore let Christians beware. It
is possible for Christians to suffer justly by the hand of the
magistrate, and therefore let Christians beware. This also is
insinuated in the text itself, and therefore let Christians beware.

The causes of this are many, some of which I shall now briefly
touch upon.

(1.) Sin is in the best of men: and as long as it is so, without
great watchfulness, and humble walking with God, we may be exposed
to shame and suffering for it. What sin is it that a child of God
is not liable to commit, excepting that which is the sin unpardonable?
Nor have we a promise of being kept from any other sin, but on
condition that we do watch and pray (Matt 26:41).

(2.) It is possible for a Christian to have an erroneous conscience
in some things, yea, in such things as, if God by his grace prevents
not, may bring us to public justice and shame. Abishai, though a
good man, would have killed the king, and that of conscience to
God, and love to his master (1 Sam 26:7,8). And had David delivered
him up to Saul for his attempt, he had in all likelihood died as
a traitor. Peter drew his sword, and would have fought therewith,
a thing for which he was blamed of his Master, and bid with a
threatening, to put it up again (Matt 26:52). Besides, oppression
makes a wise man mad; and when a man is mad what evils will he not
do? Further, The devil, who is the great enemy of the Christians,
can send forth such spirits into the world as shall not only disturb
men, but nations, kings, and kingdoms, in raising divisions,
distractions and rebellions. And can so manage matters that
the looser sort of Christians19 may be also dipped and concerned
therein. In Absalom's conspiracy against his father, there were
two hundred men called out of Jerusalem to follow him, "and they
went in their simplicity, not knowing any thing" (2 Sam 15:11). I
thank God I know of no such men, nor thing: but my judgment tells
me, that if Christians may be drawn into fornication, adultery,
murder, theft, blasphemy or the like, as they may; why should it
be thought impossible for them to be drawn in here. Wherefore I
say again, watch and pray, fear God, reverence his Word, approve
of his appointments, that you may be delivered from every evil
work and way. I said afore that the will of God may be, that a
Christian should suffer as an evil-doer; but then it is because
he keepeth not within the bounds of that, which is also called
the will of God. The will of God is, that sin should be punished,
though committed by the Christians; punished according to the
quality of transgressions: and therefore it is that he hath ordained
magistrates. Magistrates, to punish sin, though it be the sin of
Christians. They are the ministers of God, revengers, to execute
wrath, the wrath of God upon them that do evil (Rom 13). Wherefore,
though the Christian as a Christian is the only man at liberty,
as called thereunto of God; yet his liberty is limited to things
that are good: he is not licensed thereby to indulge the flesh.
Holiness and liberty are joined together, yea our call to liberty,
is a call to holiness.20 Seek, and you shall find, that a quiet
and peaceable life, in our respective places, under the government,
is that which we should pray for, to wit, that we may without
molestation, if it were "the will of God," spend our days in all
godliness and honesty among our neighbours. See 1 Timothy 2:1-8;
1 Peter 2:13-17.

[First. Caution to Christians as Christians.]--I would improve
this a little, and first, to Christians as Christians: beware the
cautions, that are here presented to you, be not neglected by
you. The evils are burning hot, as hot as a red hot iron. It is
the greatest blemish that can be to a Christian, to suffer as an
evil-doer. To say nothing of the reproach that such do bring to
the name of Christ, their Lord; to his law, their rule; and to
the Christian profession, which should be their glory: the guilt
and shame that evil actions will load the conscience with at such
a time, can hardly be stood under. The man that suffereth as an
evil-doer, and yet weareth the name of a Christian, what stumbling
blocks doth he lay in the way of the ignorant in a kingdom? The
devil told them before, that a Christian was a mischievous man; and
to suffer for evil-doing, confirms them in that belief. Consider
also the difficulties that surely such must meet with in the last
minutes of their life. For can it be imagined but that such an one
must have combats and conflicts at the last, who carry in their
consciences the guilt and condemnation that is due to their deeds,
to the place which magistrates have appointed for them to receive
the reward of their works at. Such an one bereaves not only his
own soul of peace, and his name of credit, but himself of life,
his friends of all cause of rejoicing, and casteth reproach upon
religion, as he is stepping out of the world. What shall I say,
Christians as Christians have other things to do than to concern
themselves in evil things, or to meddle in other men's matters.
Let us mind our own business, and leave the magistrate to his
work, office and calling among men also.

I speak now to them that are not by the king called to that employ.
A Christian as such has enough to do at home, in his heart, in
his house, in his shop, and the like. But if thou must needs be
meddling, consider what place, office, calling or relation, God
has put thee in, and busy thyself by the rule of the Word to a
conscientious performance of that. Nor shalt thou want dignity,
though thou art but a private Christian. Every Christian man is
made a king by Christ (Rev 5:10). But then, his dominion as such,
doth reach no further than to himself. He has not dominion over
another's faith (2 Cor 1:24). His office is to govern, and bridle,
and keep under, himself; to watch over himself, and to bring his
body into subjection to the will of God. The weapons that he has
for this purpose are not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through
God. Let him govern then, if he will be a governor, his whole man
by the Word. Let him bring down, if he must be bringing down, his
own high imaginations, and every high thing that exalts itself
against the knowledge of God. If he must be a warrior, let him
levy war against his own unruly passions, and let him fight against
those lusts that war against his soul21 (2 Cor 10:3-5; Gal 5:17;
James 3:3-8; 1 Peter 2:11).

I say therefore, if thou wilt needs be a ruler, thou hast a tongue,
rule that; lusts, rule them; affections, govern them; yea, thou hast
excellent graces, manage them, cherish, strengthen and replenish
them according to the mind of that great one who has bestowed such
power to rule, upon thee. Mortify therefore your members which are
upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection,
evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry (Col 3:5).
Nor do I think that murmuring, shrinking, wincing, complaining,
and the like, when men, governors, lay a yoke upon our necks,
flow from any thing else, but love to our flesh, and distrust of
the faithfulness of God to manage men, things, and actions for
his church. The powers that be are ordered as well as ordained of
God. They are also always in God's hand, as his rod or staff for
the good and benefit of his people. Wherefore we ought with all
meekness and humbleness of mind to accept of what our God by them
shall please to lay upon us (1 Peter 5:6). By what I now say, I do
not forbid groaning and crying to God under affliction. I speak
against striving to deliver ourselves from the affliction. And
since men are, as I said, the rod, staff or sword in God's hand,
we should apply ourselves unto him in faith in a way of prayer,
intercession, supplication and giving of thanks for governors. For
since they are sent of God, they must needs come with some good in
their hand for us, also our prayers may make them more profitable
to us. And this we ought to do without wrath and doubting; for
this is that which is good, and acceptable unto God (1 Tim 2).

Besides, it is a sign that we forget ourselves when we complain for
the punishment of our sins. If we look into ourselves, and ways,
we shall see cause of more heavy stripes than yet God by men has
laid upon us. What sin has yet been suppressed by all that has
happened to us: if pride, covetousness, looseness, treacherous
dealing, schisms, and other things, redressed by all the affliction
that we have had? Yea, do we not grow worse and worse? Wherefore
then should we complain? Where is repentance, reformation, and
amendment of life amongst us? Why, then, do we shrink and winch.
For my part, I have ofttimes stood amazed both at the mercy of
God, and the favour of the Prince towards us; and can give thanks
to God for both: and do make it my prayer to God for the king, and
that God will help me with meekness and patience to bear whatever
shall befall me for my professed subjection to Christ, by men.

We are bid, as I said afore, to give thanks to God for all men,
for kings, and for all that are in authority. Because, as I said,
there is no man with whom we have to do, we doing as we should,
but he bringeth some good thing to us, or doth some good thing for
us. We will now descend from them that are supreme in authority,
and will come to inferior men: and suppose some of them to act
beyond measure, cruelly. What? Can no good thing come to us out
of this? Do not even such things as are most bitter to the flesh,
tend to awaken Christians to faith and prayer, to a sight of the
emptiness of this world, and the fadingness of the best it yields?
Doth not God by these things ofttimes call our sins to remembrance,
and provoke us to amendment of life? how then can we be offended
at things by which we reap so much good, and at things that God
makes so profitable for us? Doth not God, ofttimes, even take
occasions by the hardest of things that come upon us, to visit our
souls with the comforts of his Spirit, to lead us into the glory
of his word, and to cause us to savour that love that he has had
for us, even from before the world began, till now. A nest of bees
and honey did Samson find, even in the belly of that lion that
roared upon him. And is all this no good? or can we be without
such holy appointments of God? Let these things be considered by
us, and let us learn like Christians to kiss the rod, and love
it.

I have thought, again, my brethren, since it is required of us
that we give thanks to God for all these men, it follows that we
do with quietness submit ourselves under what God shall do to us
by them. For it seems a paradox to me, to give thanks to God for
them, that yet I am not willing should abide in that place that
God has set them in for me. I will then love them, bless them,
pray for them, and do them good. I speak now of the men that hurt
me as was hinted afore. And I will do thus, because it is good
so to do, because they do me good by hurting of me, because I
am called to inherit a blessing, and because I would be like my
heavenly Father. "Therefore if mine enemy hunger, let me feed him;
if he thirst, let me give him drink" 22 (Matt 5:43-48; 1 Peter 3:9;
Rom 12:17-20). (1.) We must see good in that, in which other men
can see none. (2.) We must pass by those injuries that other men
would revenge. (3.) We must shew we have grace, and that we are
made to bear what other men are not acquainted with. (4.) Many of
our graces are kept alive by those very things that are the death
of other men's souls.

Where can the excellency of our patience, of our meekness, of our
long-suffering, of our love, and of our faith appear, if it be
not under trials, and in those things that run cross to our flesh?
The devil, they say, is good when he is pleased. But Christ and
his saints, when displeased.23

Let us therefore covet to imitate Christ and the scripture saints.
Let us shew out of a good conversation, our works with meekness
of wisdom. Let us take heed of admitting the least thought in our
minds of evil, against God, the king, or them that are under him
in employ, because, the cup, the king, all men, and things are
in the hand of God (Psa 75:8; Prov 8:15; 21:1; Lam 3:37). And he
can make them better to us, than if they were as our flesh desireth
they should.

I have often thought that the best Christians are found in the
worst of times: and I have thought again, that one reason why we
are no better, is because God purges us no more (John 15). I know
these things are against the grain of the flesh, but they are not
against the graces of the Spirit. Noah and Lot, who so holy as
they, in the day of their affliction? Noah and Lot, who so idle
as they in the day of their prosperity? I might have put in David
too, who, while he was afflicted, had ways of serving God that were
special; but when he was more enlarged, he had ways that were not
so good. Wherefore the first ways of David are the ways that God
has commended: but the rest of his ways, such as had not pre-eminence
(2 Chron 17:3).

We have need of all, and of more than all that has yet befallen
us: and are to thank God, since his word and patience have done no
more good to us, that he hath appointed men to make us better.24
Wherefore for a conclusion, as we are to receive with meekness the
engrafted word of God, so also we are with patience to bear what
God, by man, shall lay upon us. O that saying of God to them of old,
"Why criest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable for
the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased,
I have done these things unto thee" (Jer 30:15). We have need
to consider of, and to sit still and be quiet, and reverence the
ordinance of God: I mean affliction. And until we can in truth
get hither in our spirits, I neither look to find very right
Christianity amongst us, nor much of God among professors. When I
think of Mordecai, and Daniel, yea, and of David too, and of the
behaviour of them all with respect to the powers that they were
under, I cannot but think that a sweet, meek, quiet, loving, godly
submission unto men for the Lord's sake, is an excellent token of
the grace of God in us. But,

[Second Caution to Weak Christians.]--As I cannot but condemn
the actions of such Christians as have been touched before, so I
would caution weak Christians not to be offended with true religion
for the miscarriages of their fellows. There are two things that
are very apt to be an occasion of offence to the weak: one is,
when the cross attends religion; the other is, when others that
profess religion do suffer for evil-doing. To both these I would
say this:--

1. Though the cross, indeed, is grievous to the flesh, yet we
should with grace bear up under it, and not be offended at it.

2. And as to the second, though we should and ought to be offended
with such miscarriage; yet not with religion, because of such
miscarriage. Some, indeed, when they see these things, take offence
against religion itself; yea, perhaps, are glad of the occasion,
and so fall out with Jesus Christ, saying to him, because of the
evils that attend his ways, as the ten tribes said to Rehoboam, the
son of Solomon the king, "What portion have we in David? neither
have we inheritance in the son of Jesse; to your tents, O Israel:
now see to thine own house, David," (1 Kings 12:16); and so go
quite away from him, and cleave no more unto him, to his people,
or to his ways: but this is bad. Shun, therefore, the evil ways
of Christians, but cleave to the way that is Christian: cast away
that bad spirit that thou seest in any, but hold fast to thy Head
and Lord. Whither canst thou go? the Lord Jesus has the words
of eternal life (John 6:68). Whither wilt thou go? there is
not salvation in any other (Acts 4:12). Take heed, therefore, of
picking a quarrel with Jesus Christ, and with his ways, because
of the evil-doings of some of his followers. Judas sold him, Peter
denied him, and many of his disciples went back and did walk no
more with him; but neither himself nor his ways were the worse
for that. Beware, therefore, that thou truly distinguish between
the good ways of Jesus Christ and the evil ways of them that
profess him; and take not an occasion to throw away thy own soul
down the throat of hell, because others have vilely cast away
their lives by transgressing of the law of God. Nay, let other
men's faults make thee more wary; let other men's falls make thee
look better to thy goings: shun the rock that he that went before
thee did split his ship against; and cry to God to lead thee in
a path that is plain and good, because of thy observers.

Further, Let not opposite Christians rejoice when they see that
evil hath taken their brother by the heel. Hate the garment, the
thing that is bad, and by which the name, and fame, and life of
thy brother is so vilely cast away, thou shouldest; and take good
heed lest it also touch thee, but yet thou shouldest pity thy
brother, mourn for his hard hap, and grieve that a thing so much
unbecoming Christianity should be suffered to show the least part
of itself among any of those that profess the gospel.

Directions for the shunning of suffering for evil-doing, are they
that come next to hand.

Direction 1. Therefore, wouldest thou not suffer as an evil-doer,
then take heed of committing of evil. Evil courses bring to evil
ends; shun all appearance of evil, and ever follow that which is
good. And if ye be followers of that which is good, who will harm
you (1 Peter 3:13)? Or if there should be such enemies to goodness
in the world as to cause thee for that to suffer, thou needest
not be ashamed of thy suffering for well-doing, nor can there be
a good man, but he will dare to own and stand by thee in it. Yea,
thy sufferings for that will make thee happy, so that thou canst
by no means be a loser thereby.

Direction 2. Wouldest thou not suffer for evil-doing, then take heed
of the occasions of evil. Take heed of tempting company. Beware
of men, for they will deliver thee up. There have been men in
the world that have sought to make themselves out of the ruins of
other men. This did Judas, and some of the Pharisees (Matt 10:17;
Luke 20:19,20). Take heed to thy mouth: "A fool's mouth calleth
for strokes,--and his lips are the snare of his soul" (Prov 18:7).
Take heed of indulging, and hearkening to the ease of the flesh,
and of carnal reasonings, for that will put thee upon wicked
things.

Direction 3. Wouldest thou not suffer as an evil-doer, then take
heed of hearing of any thing spoken that is not according to sound
doctrine: thou must withdraw thyself from such in whom thou perceivest
not the words of knowledge. Let not talk against governors, against
powers, against men in authority be admitted; keep thee far from
an evil matter. My son, says Solomon, fear thou the Lord, and the
King, and meddle not with those that are given to change.

Direction 4. Wouldest thou not suffer as an evil-doer, addict not
thyself to play with evil, 25 to joke and jest, and mock at men
in place and power. Gaal mocked at Abimelech, and said, Who is
Abimelech that we should serve him? But he paid for his disdainful
language at last (Judg 9). I have heard of an innkeeper here in
England, whose sign was the crown, and he was a merry man. Now he
had a boy, of whom he used to say, when he was jovial among his
guests, This boy is heir to the crown, or this boy shall be heir
to the crown; and if I mistake not the story, for these words he
lost his life.26 It is bad jesting with great things, with things
that are God's ordinance, as kings and governors are. Yea, let them
rather have that fear, that honour, that reverence, that worship,
that is due to their place, their office, and dignity. How Paul
gave honour and respect unto those that were but deputy-kings and
heathen magistrates, will greatly appear, if you do but read his
trials before them in the book called, The Acts of the Apostles.
And what a charge both he and Peter have left behind them to the
churches to do so too, may be found to conviction, if we read
their epistles.

Direction 5. Wouldest thou not suffer for evil-doing, then take
heed of being offended with magistrates, because by their state
acts they may cross thy inclinations. It is given to them to bear
the sword, and a command is to thee, if thy heart cannot acquiesce
with all things with meekness and patience, to suffer. Discontent
in the mind sometimes puts discontent into the mouth; and discontent
in the mouth doth sometimes also put a halter about the neck. For
as a man, by speaking a word in jest may for that be hanged in
earnest; so he that speaks in discontent may die for it in sober
sadness. Adonijah's discontent put him upon doing that which cost
him his life (1 Kings 2:13,23). Great peace have they that love
thy law, and nothing shall offend them; for they are subjected to
the will and foot of God.

Direction 6. But, above all, get thy conscience possessed yet more
with this, that the magistrate is God's ordinance, and is ordered
of God as such: that he is the minister of God to thee for good,
and that it is thy duty to fear him, and pray for him, to give
thanks to God for him, and to be subject to him as both Paul and
Peter admonish us; and that not only for wrath, but for conscience
sake (Rom 13:5). For all other arguments come short of binding
the soul, where this argument is wanting; until we believe that
of God we are bound thereto. I speak not these things, as knowing
any that are disaffected to the government; for I love to be
alone, if not with godly men, in things that are convenient. But
because I appear thus in public, and know not into whose hands
these lines may come, therefore thus I write. I speak it also to
show my loyalty to the king, and my love to my fellow-subjects;
and my desire that all Christians should walk in ways of peach
and truth.

[2. That Christians may, and have, suffered according to the will
of God.]

I come now to the second thing propounded to be spoken to, as to
suffering, which is this.--That there have been, and yet may be,
a people in the world that have, and may, suffer in the sense of
the apostle here, according to the will of God, or for righteousness'
sake.

That there have been such a people in the world, I think nobody
will deny, because many of the prophets, Christ, and his apostles,
thus suffered. Besides, since the Scriptures were written, all
nations can witness to this, whose histories tell at large of
the patience and goodness of the sufferers, and of the cruelty of
those that did destroy them. And that the thing will yet happen,
or come to pass again, both Scripture and reason affirm.

First, Scripture. The text tells us, That God hath put enmity
betwixt the woman and her seed, and the serpent and his seed (Gen
3:15). This enmity put, is so fixed that none can remove it so,
but that it still will remain in the world. These two seeds have
always had, and will have, that which is essentially opposite
to one another, and they are "the spirit of truth and the spirit
of error" (1 John 4:6), sin and righteousness (3:7,8), light and
darkness (1 Thess 5:5). Hence "an unjust man is an abomination
to the just; and he that is upright in the way is abomination to
the wicked" (Prov 29:27). So that unless you could sanctify and
regenerate all men, or cause that no more wicked men should any
where be in power for ever, you cannot prevent but that sometimes
still there must be sufferers for righteousness' sake. "Yea, and
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution"
(2 Tim 3:12).

Second, To prove this by reason is easy. The devil is not yet shut
up in the bottomless pit--Antichrist is yet alive. The government
in all kingdoms is not yet managed with such light, and goodness
of mind, as to let the saints serve God, as he has said, whatever
it is in some. And until then there will be in some places, though
for my part I cannot predict where, a people that will yet suffer
for well-doing, or for righteousness' sake.

In order to a right handling of this matter, I shall divide this
head into these two parts--A. Show you what it is to suffer for
well-doing, or for righteousness. B. Show you what it is to suffer
for righteousness' sake. I put this distinction, because I find
that it is one thing to suffer for righteousness, and another to
suffer for righteousness' sake.

[A. What it is to suffer for righteousness.]

To begin with the first, namely, to show you what it is to suffer
for righteousness. Now that may be done either passively or actively.

1. Passively, as when any suffer for righteousness without their own
will, or consent thereto. Thus, the little children at Bethlehem
suffered by the hands of bloody Herod, when they died for, or
in the room and stead of, Jesus Christ (Matt 2:16). Every one of
those children died for righteousness, if Christ is righteousness;
for they died upon his account, as being supposed to be he himself.
Thus also the children of Israel's little ones, that were murdered
with their parents, or otherwise, because of the religion of them
that begat and bare them, died for righteousness. The same may
be said concerning those of them that suffered in the land of the
Chaldeans upon the same account. I might here also bring in those
poor infants that in Ireland, Piedmont, Paris, and other places,
have had their throats cut, and their brains dashed out against
the walls, for none other cause but for the religion of their
fathers. Many, many have suffered for righteousness after this
manner. Their will, nor consent, has been in the suffering, yet
they have suffered for religion, for righteousness. And as this
hath been, so it may be again; for if men may yet suffer for
righteousness, even so, for ought I know, even in this sense, may
their children also.

Now, although this is not the chief matter of my text, yet a few
words here may do no harm. The children that thus suffer, though
their own will and consent be not in what they undergo, may yet,
for all that, be accepted as an offering unto the Lord. Their
cause is good; it is for religion and righteousness. Their hearts
do not recoil against the cause for which they suffer; and although
they are children, God can deal with them as with John the Baptist,
cause them in a moment to leap for joy of Christ; or else can save
them by his grace, as he saveth other his elect infants, and thus
comprehend them, though they cannot apprehend him; yea, why may
they not only be saved, but in some sense be called martyrs of
Jesus Christ, and those that have suffered for God's cause in the
world? God comforted Rachel concerning her children that Herod
murdered in the stead, and upon the account of Christ.27

He bids her refrain herself from tears, by this promise, that her
children should come again from the land of the enemy, from death.
And again, said he, Thy children shall come again to their own
border; which I think, if it be meant in a gospel sense, must be
to the heavenly inheritance. Compare Jeremiah 31:15-17 with Matthew
2:18.28

And methinks this should be mentioned, not only for her and their
sakes, but to comfort all those that either have had, or yet may
have, their children thus suffer for righteousness. None of these
things, as shall be further showed anon, happen without the determinate
counsel of God. He has ordered the sufferings of little children
as well as that of persons more in years. And it is easy to think
that God can as well foresee which of his elect shall suffer by
violent hands in their infancy, as which of them shall then die
a natural death. He has saints small in age as well as in esteem
or otherwise and sometimes the least member of the body suffereth
violence, as well as the head or other chief parts. And although
I desire not to see these days again, yet methinks it will please
me to see those little ones that thus have already suffered for
Jesus, to stand in their white robes with the elders of their
people, before the throne, to sing unto the Lamb.

2. Actively. But to pass this, and to come to that which is more
directly intended to be spoken to, namely, to show you who doth
actively suffer for righteousness. And,

(1.) It is he that chooseth by his own will and consent to suffer
for it. All suffering that can be called active suffering, must
be by the consent of the will; and that is done when a man shall
have sin and suffering set before him, and shall choose suffering
rather than sin. He chose "rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season"
(Heb 11:25). And again, They did not accept of deliverance, that
is, of base and unworthy terms, "that they might obtain a better
resurrection" (verse 35).

Indeed, no man can force a Christian to suffer as a Christian,
without his own consent. All Christians are sufferers of will and
consent. Hence it is said, they must take up their cross, by which
taking up, an act of their will is intended (Matt 10:38; 16:24).
So again, "Take my yoke upon you," which also intends an act of
the will (11:29). This, therefore, is the first thing that I would
present you with. Not that an act of the will is enough to declare
a man a sufferer for righteousness, it standing alone; for a man,
through the strength of delusion, and the power of an erroneous
conscience, may be willing to suffer for the grossest opinions
in the world. But I bring it to show that actual suffering for
righteousness must also be by the consent of the will--the mind
of the man must be in it.

(2.) He that suffereth for righteousness thus, must also have a
good cause. A good cause is that which is essential to suffering
for righteousness. A good cause, what is that? Why, verily, it is
the truth of God, either in the whole of it, as contained in the
Scriptures of truth, or in the parts of it, as set before me to
believe, or do, by any part of that holy Word. This may be called
the matter for which one suffereth; or, as it is called in another
place, "the word of righteousness" (Heb 5:13). It may also be
called the form of sound doctrine, or the like. Because without
this Word, the matter and nature of God's truths cannot be known.
Pilate's question, "What is truth?" will still abide a question,
to those that have not, or regard not the Word, the rule of
righteousness (John 18:38). See then that thy cause be good, thou
that wouldest know what it is to suffer for righteousness; step
not an hair's breadth without the bounds of the Word of truth;
also take heed of misunderstanding, or of wringing out of its
place, any thing that is there. Let the words of the upright stand
upright, warp them not, to the end they may comply in show with
any crooked notion. And to prevent this, take these three words
as a guide, in this matter to thee. They show men their sins, and
how to close with a Saviour; they enjoin men to be holy and humble;
they command men to submit themselves to authority. And whatever
is cross to these, comes from ignorance of, or from wresting, the
rule of righteousness out of its place.

But more particularly, the word of righteousness--thy cause,
within the bounds of which thou must keep, if thou wilt suffer for
righteousness, is to be divided into two parts. (1.) It containeth
a revelation of moral righteousness. (2.) It containeth a revelation
of evangelical righteousness. As for moral righteousness, men
seldom suffer; only, for that. Because that is the righteousness
of the world, and that, simply as such, that sets itself up in
every man's conscience, and has a testimony for itself, even in
the light of nature. Besides, there is nothing that maketh head
against that; but that which every man is ashamed, by words to
plead for, and that is immorality. And this is that which Peter
intends when he saith, "And if ye be followers of that which is
good, who will harm you?" (1 Peter 3:13). If ye be followers of
moral goodness. But if it should so happen, for the case is rare,
that any man should make you sufferers because you love God, and
do good to your neighbour, happy are ye. Though I do not think
that the apostle's conclusion terminates there. But more of these
things anon.

For let a man be a good neighbour in morals; let him feed the hungry,
clothe the naked, give freely out of his purse to the poor, and
do that which he would another should do to him; and stop there,
and not meddle with the name of Christ, and he shall have but few
enemies in the world. For it is not the law, but Christ, that is
the stumbling-block, and the rock of offence to men (Isa 8:14,15;
Rom 9:31-33).

Wherefore, there is in God's Word a revelation of another
righteousness--a righteousness which is not so visible to, yea,
and that suiteth not so with, the reason of man as that moral
righteousness doth. Wherefore this righteousness makes men righteous
in principle, and practise so, as is foreign to natural men. Hence
it is said to be foolishness to them (1 Cor 2:14). And again,
"Its praise is not of men" (Rom 2:29). This righteousness is also
revealed in the Scriptures, but the blind cannot see it. It is
the work of the Holy Ghost in the heart, and is therefore called
the fruits of the Spirit; and the grace, which in the head and
fullness of it, is only to be found in Christ (John 1:16; Col
1:19; 1 Tim 1:14). This righteousness being planted in the heart,
leads a man out by the Word of God, to seek for another righteousness,
as invisible to, and foreign from, the natural man, as this. And
that righteousness is that which properly is the righteousness of
Jesus Christ--a righteousness that standeth in his obedience to
his Father's law, as he was considered a common or public person--a
righteousness which he brought into the world, not for himself,
as considered in a private capacity, but for those that shall by
faith venture themselves upon him, to obtain by him life eternal
(Rom 5:19; Phil 3:7-10).

Again, This closing by faith, with this righteousness thus found
in Christ, and being taken therewith, leads me yet to another
righteousness, which is instituted worship, appointed by Christ,
for all his followers to be conversant in; this worship is grounded
on positive precepts, and so on words of righteousness, called
Christ's words, Christ's sayings, &c.

Now, upon this bottom begins the difference betwixt the men of God
and the world. For, first, by this inward principle of righteousness
we come to see, and say, that men by nature are not Christians, what
privileges soever they may account themselves partakers thereof.
But whosoever is a Christian, of God's making so, is begotten and
born of God, and made a new creature by the anointing received
from the Holy One (James 1:18; John 3:3,5; 2 Cor 5:17,18; 1:21;
1 John 2:20,24,27). Now, this these carnal men cannot endure to
hear of; because it quite excludes them, as such, from a share
in the kingdom of heaven. To this, again, the Christian stands
and backs what he says by the Word of God. Then the game begins,
and the men of the world are thoughtful how they may remove such
troublesome fellows out of the way. But because the Christians
love their neighbours, and will not let them thus easily die in
their sins, therefore they contend with them, both by reasonings,
writings, sermons, and books of gospel divinity; and stand to what
they say. The world, again, are angry with these sayings, sermons,
and books, for that by them they are concluded to be persons that
are without repentance, and the hope of eternal life. Here again,
the carnal world judges that these people are proud, self-willed,
pragmatical, contentious, self-conceited, and so unsufferable people.
The Christian yet goes on and stands to what he has asserted. Then
the poor world at their last shift begins to turn, and overturn
the gospel-man's sayings; perverting, forcing, stretching, and
dismembering of them; and so making of them speak what was never
thought, much less intended by the believer.

Thus they served our Lord; for, not being able to down with29 his
doctrine, they began to pervert his words, and to make, as also
they said afterwards of Luther's, some offensive, some erroneous,
some treasonable, and that both against God and Caesar, and so they
hanged him up, hoping there to put an end to things. But this is
but the beginning of things; for the Christian man, by the word
of the gospel, goes further with his censure. For he also findeth
fault with all that this man, by the ability of nature, can do
for the freeing himself from the law of sin and death. He condemns
him by the Word, because he is in a state of nature, and he
condemneth also whatever, while in that state, he doth, as that
which by no means can please God (Rom 14:23; Heb 11:6). This now
puts him more out; this is a taking of his gods away from him.
This is to strip him of his raiment, such as it is, and to turn
him naked into the presence of God. This, I say, puts him out and
out. These wild-brained fellows, quote he, are never content, they
find fault with us as to our state; they find fault with us as to
our works, our best works. They blame us because we are sinners,
and they find fault with us, though we mend; they say, by nature
we are no Christians, and that our best doings will not make
us such. What would they have us do? Thus, therefore, they renew
their quarrel; but the Christian man cannot help it, unless he
would see them go to hell, and saying nothing. For the Word of God
doth as assuredly condemn man's righteousness, as it doth condemn
man's sin; it condemneth not man's righteousness among men, for
there it is good and profitable (Job 35:6-8), but with God, to
save the soul, it is no better than filthy rags (Isa 64:6). Nor
will this Christian man suffer these carnal ones to delude themselves
with a change of terms; for the devil, who is the great manager
of carnal men in things that concern their souls, and in the plea
that they make for themselves, will help them to tricks and shifts
to evade the power of the Word of God. Teaching them to call
the beauties of nature grace, and the acts of natural powers the
exercise of the graces of the Spirit, he will embolden them also
to call man's righteousness the righteousness of Christ, and that
by which a sinner may be justified in the sight of God from the
law. These tricks the Christian sees, and being faithful to God's
truth, and desiring the salvation of his neighbour, he laboureth
to discover the fallacy of, and to propound better terms for this
poor creature to embrace, and venture his soul upon; which terms
are warranted by the New Testament, a stranger to which the natural
man is. But, I say, the things which the Christian presseth, being
so foreign to nature, and lying so cross to man's best things, are
presently judged by the natural man to be fables or foolishness
(1 Cor 2:14). Wherefore here again, he takes another occasion to
maintain his strife, and contention against the righteous man;
raising of slanders upon him, and laying things to his charge that
he understandeth not; charging also his doctrine with many grievous
things. Namely, that he holdeth that man was made to be damned;
that man's righteousness is no better than sin; that a man had as
good to do ill as well; that we may believe, and do what we list;
that holiness pleaseth not God; and that sinning is the way to cause
grace to abound. Besides, say they, he condemneth good motions,
and all good beginnings of heart to God-ward; he casteth away that
good we have, and would have us depend upon a justice to save us
by, that we can by no means approve of. And thus the quarrel is
made yet wider between the men of the world and Christian man.
But there is not a stop put here.

For it is possible for the carnal man to be beaten out of all his
arguments for himself and his own things, by the power and force
of the Word; and to be made to consent to what the Christian has
said as to the notion of the truth. I must not speak this of all.
But yet the breach doth still abide; for that yet there appears
to be no more with the man, but only the notion of things. For
though the notion of things are those that of God are made the
means of conveying of grace into the heart, yet grace is not always
with the notion of things; the Word ofttimes standeth in man's
understanding alone, and remaineth there, as not being accompanied
with such grace as can make it the power of God to salvation. Now,
when it is thus with the soul, the danger is as great as ever,
because there is a presumption now begotten in the heart that
the man is in a saved condition,--a presumption, I say, instead
of faith, which puffeth up, instead of enabling the soul after a
godly manner to depend upon God for mercy through Christ. This is
called the word of them that are puffed up; the word only, because
not accompanied with saving grace (1 Cor 4:19; 8:1; 1 Thess 1:5).

This the Christian also sees, and says it is too weak to conduct
the soul to glory. And this, indeed, he says, because he would not
that his neighbour should come short home. But neither can this be
borne; but here again, the natural man with his notion of things
is offended; and takes pet against his friend, because he tells
him the truth, and would that he so should digest the truth, that
it may prove unto him eternal life. Wherefore he now begins to
fall out again, for as yet the enmity is not removed; he therefore
counts him an unmerciful man, one that condemneth all to hell but
himself; and as to his singularity in things, those he counteth
for dreams, for enthusiasms, for allegorical whimsies, vain
revelations, and the effects of an erroneous judgment. For the
Lord has put such darkness betwixt Egypt and Israel, as will not
suffer them to come together. But this is not all.

For it is possible for these carnal men to be so much delighted
in the notion of things, as to addict themselves to some kind
of worship of Christ, whose notions of truth have by them been
received. And because their love is yet but carnal, and because
the flesh is swelling, and is pleased with pomp and sumptuousness,
therefore, to show how great an esteem such have for Christ, whom
they are now about to worship, they will first count his testament,
though good, a thing defective, and not of fullness sufficient
to give, in all particular things, direction how they should, to
their own content, perform their glorious doctrine. For here and
there, and in another place, cry they, there is something wanting.
Here, say they, is nothing said of those places, vestures, gestures,
shows, and outward greatness that we think seemly to be found in
and with those that worship Jesus. Here wants sumptuous ceremonies,
glorious ornaments, new fashioned carriages, 30 all which are
necessary to adorn worship withal.

But now here again, the truly godly, as he comes to see the evil of
things, maketh his objections, and findeth fault, and counts them
unprofitable and vain (Isa 29; Matt 15; Mark 7). But they again,
seeing the things they have made are the very excellencies of human
invention, and things added as a supplement to make up what, and
wherein, as they think, that man that was faithful over his own
house as a son was defective. They are resolved to stand upon
their points, and not to budge an inch from the things that are so
laudable, so necessary, so convenient, and so comely; the things
that have been judged good, by so many wise, learned, pious, holy,
reverend, and good men. Nay, if this were all, the godly would
make a good shift; but their zeal is so great for what they have
invented, and their spirits so hot to make others couch and bend
thereto, that none must be suffered to their power to live and
breathe, that refuseth to conform thereto.31 This has been proved
too true, both in France, Spain, Germany, Italy, and other places;
and upon this account it is that persecution has been kept alive
so many hundred years in some places against the church of God.

From what has been said as to these things, this I collect as the
sum--First, That man by nature is in a state of wrath and condemnation
(Eph 2:1-4; John 3:18). Secondly, That the natural man, by all
his natural abilities, is not able to recover himself from this
his condemned condition (John 6:44; Eph 1:19,20). Thirdly, That
a man may have right notions of gospel things, that hath no grace
in his heart (1 Cor 13:2,3). Fourthly, That to add human inventions
to Christ's institutions, and to make them of the same force and
necessity, of the same authority and efficacy, is nought; and not
to be subjected to (Isa 29:13; Matt 15:8,9; Mark 7:6,7).

So then, he that saith these things, saith true; for the Scriptures
say the same. This, then, is a good cause to suffer for, if men
will that I shall suffer for saying so; because it is that which
is founded upon the Word of God; and the Word is the ground and
foundation of all true doctrine. Let him, then, that believeth
what is here discoursed, and that liveth soberly and peaceably in
this belief among his neighbours, stand by what he hath received,
and rejoice that he hath found the truth. And if any shall afflict
or trouble him for holding of these things, they afflict or trouble
him for holding to good things; and he suffereth at their hands
because his cause is good.

And such an one may with boldness, as to this, make his appeal to
the Bible, which is the foundation of his principles, and to God
the author of that foundation, if what he holds is not good. He
may say, "Lord, I have said, that man by nature is in a state of
condemnation, and they make me suffer for that. Lord, I have
asserted that man, by all his natural abilities, is not able to
recover himself from this his condemned state, and they make me
suffer for that. Lord, I have said that a natural man may have
right notions of the gospel, and yet be without the saving grace
thereof, and they make me suffer for that. Lord, I cannot consent
that human inventions and doctrines of men should be joined with thy
institution as matters of worship, and imposed upon my conscience
as such, and they make me suffer for that. Lord, I own the government,
pray for my superiors, live quietly among my neighbours, give to
all their dues, feed the hungry, clothe the naked, relieve the
afflicted, and show myself, by my faith and life, to be a true
Christian man, and yet my neighbours will not let me alone. True,
I cannot comply with all that some men would have me comply with;
no more did Daniel, no more did Paul; and yet Daniel said, that he
had to the king done no hurt (Dan 6:22), and Paul said, 'neither
against the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet
against Caesar, have I offended anything at all'" (Acts 25:8).

For he that keeps within the compass of God's Word, hurts no man,
gives just offence to no man, though he complieth not with all that
are modes and ways of worship in the world. Nor can this appeal
be judged injurious, if it be not attended with intercessions
against them that hate us. But we will pass this, and come to a
second thing.

(3.) As he that suffereth for righteousness must have a good cause,
so he that suffereth for righteousness must have a good call.

A man, though his cause be good, ought not by undue ways to run
himself into suffering for it; nature teaches the contrary, and so
doth the law of God. Suffering for a truth ought to be cautiously
took in hand, and as warily performed. I know that there are some
men that are more concerned here than some; the preacher of the
Word is by God's command made the more obnoxious man, for he must
come off with a woe, if he preaches not the gospel (1 Cor 9:16).
He, therefore, I say, doth and ought more to expose himself than
other Christians are called to do. Yet it behoveth him also to
beware, because that Christ has said to him, "Behold, I send you
forth as sheep, or lambs, in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves" (Matt 10:16; Luke 10:3).
A man is not bound by the law of his Lord, to put himself into
the mouth of his enemy. Christ withdrew himself; Paul escaped the
governor's hands, by being let down in a basket over the wall of
the city (2 Cor 11:32,33). And Christ hath said, If they persecute
you in one city, flee ye to another. If they will not let me
preach here, I will take up my Bible, and be gone. Perhaps this is
because I must preach in some other place. A minister can quickly
pack up, and carry his religion with him, and offer what he
knows of his God to another people32 (Acts 13:44-47). Nor should
a minister strive, I think, with the magistrate for place, or time.
But let him hearken to hear what God shall say by such opposition.
Perhaps the magistrate must drive thee out of this place, because
the soul is in another place that is to be converted, or helped
by thy sermon today. We must also in all things, show ourselves
to be such as by our profession we would that men should believe
we are, to wit, meek, gentle, not strivers, but take our Lord and
our brethren the prophets for our examples.

But I will not here presume to give instructions to ministers; but
will speak a few words in the general about what I think may be a
sufficient call to a man to suffer for righteousness.

First, Every Christian man is bound by God's Word to hold to, or
stand by his profession, his profession of faith, and to join to
that profession an holy godly life; because the Apostle and High
priest of his profession is no less a one than Christ Jesus (Heb
3:1; 10:23). This by Christ himself is expressed thus, Let your
light so shine (Matt 5:16). No man lighteth a candle to put it
under a bushel. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights
burning (Luke 12:35). And Paul bids the Philippians hold forth
the word of life (Phil 2:16).

And more particularly, by all this, this is intended, that we
should hide our faith in Christ from no man, but should rather make
a discover of it by a life that will do so; for our profession,
thus managed, is the badge, and the Lord's livery, by which we
are distinguished from other men.33 So then, if, while I profess
the truth of Christ, and so walk as to make my profession of it
more apparent, I be made a sufferer for it, my call is good, and
I may be bold in God and in my profession. This, Peter intends
when he saith, "But and if ye suffer for righteousness" sake, happy
are ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled;
but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekness and fear (1 Peter 3:14,15). Here,
then, is a call not to meddle with the other, but to mind our own
business; to walk in our Christian profession, and to adorn it
with all good works; and if any man will meddle with me, and ask
me a reason of the hope that I have, to give it him with meekness
and fear, whatever follows thereupon. This, Peter should have done
himself there, where he denies his Master thrice.

The reason is, for that Christianity is so harmless a thing, that,
be it never so openly professed, it hurts no man. I believe that
Christ will save me; what hurt is this to my neighbour? I love
Christ because he will save me; what hurt is this to any? I will
for this worship Christ as he has bid me; what hurt is this to
anybody? I will also tell my neighbours what a loving one my Christ
is, and that he is willing to be good to them as he has been good
to me; and what hurt is this to the governor of a kingdom? But and
if any man will afflict me for this, my cause is good, and also
my call to stand full godly to my profession.

Secondly, There is sometimes a call to suffer for righteousness, even
from the voice of necessity. That is, either when, by my silence,
the truth must fall to the ground; or when, by my shrinking, the
souls of other men are in danger. This, I say, is a call to suffer
even by the voice of necessity. The case may be when God's ways
may be trodden under foot; yea, his Word, and ways, and name, and
people, and all. Thus Goliath did do, for several days together
(1 Sam 17), and vaunted in his doing; and there was not a man,
no, not in Israel, that durst answer him a word. And now was the
spirit of David stirred in him, and he would put his life in his
hand, and give this man an answer; and he saw there was reason
for it--necessity gave him a call. Is there not a cause, saith
he, lies bleeding upon the ground, and no man of heart or spirit
to put a check to the bold blasphemer? I will go fight with him;
I will put my life in my hand; if I die, I die.

Consider also what Daniel did when the law was gone out to forbid,
for thirty days, petitioning any god or man, save the king only.
At that time, also, not a man of Israel peeped (Dan 6:7). Now
necessity walks about the streets, crying, Who is on the Lord's
side? Who, &c. And Daniel answers, I am, by opening of his window,
and praying, as at other times, three times a day, with his face
towards Jerusalem (verse 10). He heard this voice of necessity,
and put his life in his hand, and complied with it, to the hazard
of being torn in pieces by the lions.

Much like this was that of the three children; for when that golden
image was set up, and worship commanded to be done unto it, not
one, that we read of, durst stand upright when the time was come
that bowing was the sign of worship. Only the three children would
not bow: it was necessary that some should show that there was a
God in heaven, and that divine worship was due alone to him (Dan
3:10-12). But they run the hazard of being turned to ashes, in
a burning fiery furnace, for so doing. But necessity has a loud
voice, and shrill in the ears of a tender conscience: this voice
will awake jealousy and kindle a burning fire within, for the
name, and cause, and way, and people, of the God of heaven.

Thirdly, There is sometimes a call to suffer for righteousness by
the voice of providence. That is, when, by providence, I am cast
for my profession into the hands of the enemies of God and his
truth; then I am called to suffer for it what God shall please to
let them lay upon me. Only, for the making of my way more clear
in this matter, I will deliver what I have to say, with a caution
or two. 1. Thou must take heed that thy call be good to this or
that place, at which, by providence, thou art delivered up. 2.
Thou must also take heed that, when thou art there, thou busiest
thyself in nothing but that that good is. 3. Thou must also take
heed that thou stay there no longer than while thou mayest do
good or receive good there. 4. Thus far a man is in the way of
his duty, and therefore may conclude that the providence of God,
under which now he is, is such as has mercy and salvation in the
bowels of it, whatsoever is by it, at the present, brought upon
him.

Christ Jesus, our Lord, though his death was determined, and of
absolute necessity, and that chiefly for which he came into the
world, chose rather to be taken in the way of his duty than in any
other way or anywhere else. Wherefore, when the hour was come,
he takes with him some of his disciples, and goeth into a garden,
a solitary place, to pray; which done, he sets his disciples to
watch, and falleth himself to prayer. So he prays once; he prays
twice; he prays thrice: and he giveth also good doctrine to his
disciples. And now, behold, while he was here, in the way of his
duty, busying himself in prayer to God, and in giving of good
instruction to his followers, upon him comes Judas and a multitude with
swords and staves, and weapons, to take him; to which providence
he, in all meekness, submits, for he knew that by it he had a call
to suffer (Matt 26:36-47).

In this way, also, the apostles were called to suffer, even while
they were in the way of their duty. Yea, God bid them go into the
temple to preach, and there delivered them into the hands of their
enemies (Acts 4:1-3; 5:20-26).

Be we in the way of our duty, in the place and about the work
unto which we are called of God, whether that work be religious
or civil, we may, without fear, leave the issue of things to God,
who only doth wonderful things. And he who lets not a sparrow fall
to the ground without his providence, will not suffer a hair of
our head to perish but by his order (Luke 12:6,7). And since he
has engaged us in his work, as he has if he has called us to it,
we may expect that he will manage, and also bear us out therein;
either so as by giving of us a good deliverance by way of restoration
to our former liberty and service for him, or so as to carry us
well out of this world to them that, under the altar, are crying,
How long, holy and true: nor shall we, when we come there, repent
that we suffered for him here. Oh! how little do saints, in a
suffering condition, think of the robes, the crowns, the harps,
and the Son that shall be given to them; and that they shall have
when they come upon mount Zion (Rev 6:11; 14:1-7).

Fourthly, There is sometimes a call to suffer for righteousness by
an immediate and powerful impulse of the Spirit of God upon the
heart. This, I say, is sometimes, and but sometimes; for this is
not God's ordinary way, nor are many of his servants called after
this manner to suffer for righteousness. Moses was called thus
to suffer when he went so often unto Pharaoh with the message of
God in his mouth. And "he endured, as seeing him who is invisible"
(Heb 11:25-27).

Paul was called thus to suffer, and he obeyed, and went, and
performed that work, according to the will of God. This kind of
call Paul calls a binding, or a being bound in the Spirit, because
the Holy Ghost had laid such a command upon him to do so, that
he could not, by any means, get from under the power of it. "And
now, behold," saith he, "I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem,
not knowing the things that shall befal me there" (Acts 20:22).
For he that is under this call has, as I said, bonds laid upon
his spirit, which carry him to the place where his testimony is
to be borne for God; nor shall he, if he willingly submits and
goes, as Paul did, but have an extraordinary presence of God with
him, as he. And see what a presence he had; for after the second
assault was given him by the enemy, even "the night following, the
Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul; for as thou
hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness
also at Rome" (Acts 23:11). Thus God meeteth his people in their
service for him, when he calls them aloud to do great service for
him. The power of such a call as this, I say, is great, and men
of ordinary spirits must needs give place thereto, and leave a man
thus bound to the God that thus has bound him. All the help such
can afford him is to follow him with our prayers, not to judge him
or grieve him, or lay stumbling-blocks before him. No; they must
not weep nor mourn for him, so as to make him sorrowful (Acts
21:12-14).

His friends may suggest unto him what is like to attend his
present errand, as Agabus did by the Spirit to Paul when he took
his girdle and bound himself therewith, to show him how his enemies
should serve him whither he went. "Thus said the Holy Ghost," said
he, "so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this
girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles" (Acts
21). But if this call be indeed upon a man, all sorrow is turned
into joy before him; for he is ready, not only to be bound, but
also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus (Acts
21:13).

Instances, also, of later times might be given of a call extraordinary
to suffer for righteousness. For many, in the first three hundred
years' persecution, when nobody knew what they were, would boldly
come up to the face of their enemies and tell what they were,
and suffer for what they professed, the death. I remember, also,
the woman who, when her friends were gone before to suffer, how
she came running and panting after, for fear she should not come
thither time enough to suffer for Jesus Christ. But I will give
you an instance of later times, even in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, of an Hertfordshire man that went as far as
Rome to bear his testimony for God against the wickedness of that
place. This man, when he was arrived there, and had told them
wherefore he was come, they took and condemned him to death,
to wit, to be burned for an heretic. Now he was to ride from the
prison to the place of execution upon an ass, with his face to
the beast's tail, and was to be stripped from the shoulders to
the waist, that he might be tormented all the way he went with
burning torches continually thrust to his sides; but he, nothing
at all afraid, spake in his exhortation to the people to fly from
their sin and idolatry; he would also catch hold of the torches
and put them to his sides, to show how little he esteemed the
worst that they could do. Also, when he was come to the place of
execution, he suffered there such cruelty, with so unconcerned a
mind, and with such burning zeal for God's truth, testified against
them while he could speak; that, all amazed, his enemies cried,
he could not have suffered as he did but by the help of the devil.
His name I have now forgot, but you will find it, with the story
at large, in the third volume of Acts and Monuments, at the 1022
page. 34 But we will pass this, and come to our second particular,
namely,

[B. What it is to suffer for righteousness' sake.]

To show when it may be said a man doth not only suffer for
righteousness, but also for righteousness' sake.

To suffer for righteousness' sake must be either with the intention
of the persecutor or else of the persecuted. The persecutor,
whatever the person's suffering is, if he afflicteth this person
for a supposed good that he thinketh he hath or professeth, he
make him suffer for righteousness' sake. So that, in this sense,
a man that hath no grace may not only suffer for righteousness,
but also for righteousness' sake. But this I intend not, because
the text is not concerned with it.

The thing, therefore, now intended to be spoken to, is this,
namely, when a man may be said to suffer what he suffereth upon a
religious account, of love to, or for the sake of, that good that
he finds in the truths of God, or because his heart is joined and
espoused to the good of the truths that he professeth; not that
there is any thing in any truth of God that is not good; but a
man may profess truth, not for the sake of the goodness that is
in it, but upon a remote account. Judas professed truth, not of
love to the truth, but of love to the bag, and to the money that
was put therein. Men may profess for a wife, for a trade, for
friendship, or because profession is at such a time or in such
a place, in fashion. I wish that there were no cause to say this.
Now there is not any of these that profess the truth for the truth's
sake, that profess the truth of love to it; nor shall they, should
they suffer as professors, never so long, never so much, never
so grievously, be counted of God among them that suffer for
righteousness' sake; that is, of unfeigned love to righteousness.
Wherefore, that I may show you who may be said to suffer for
righteousness' sake, I will propound and speak to several things.

1. Then, he that suffereth in the apostle's sense, for well-doing,
or for righteousness' sake, sets his face against nothing but sin.
He resisteth unto blood, striving against sin. Sin is the object
of his indignation, because it is an enemy to God, and to his
righteous cause in the world (Heb 12:3,4). Sin, I say, is that
which such a man singleth out as his opposite, as his antagonist,
and that against which his heart is set. It is a rare thing to
suffer aright, and to have my spirit, in my suffering, bent only
against God's enemy--sin; sin in doctrine, sin in worship, sin
in life, sin in conversation. Now then, he that suffereth for
righteousness' sake has singled out sin to pursue it to death, long
before he comes to the cross. It is sin, alas, and his hatred to
it that have brought him into this condition. He fell out with sin
at home, in his own house, in his own heart, before he fell out
with sin in the world, or with sin in public worship. For he that
can let sin go free and uncontrolled at home within, let him suffer
while he will, he shall not suffer for righteousness' sake. And
the reason is, because a righteous soul, as the phrase is, 2 Peter
2:8, has the greatest antipathy against that sin that is most ready
to defile it, and that is, as David calls it, one's own iniquity,
or the sin that dwelleth in one's own flesh. I have kept me, says
he, from mine iniquity, from mine own sin. People that are afraid
of fire are concerned most with that that burneth in their own
chimney; they have the most watchful eye against that that is like
to burn down their own house first.

He also that suffereth for righteousness' sake, doth it also because
he would not that sin should cleave to the worship of God; and,
indeed, this is mostly the cause of the sufferings of the godly.
They will not have to do with that worship that hath sinful
traditions commixed with God's appointments, because they know
that God is jealous of his worship; and has given a strict charge
that all things be done according to the pattern showed to us in
the mount. He knows also that God will not be with that worship,
and those worshippers, that have not regard to worship by the
rule of the testament of Christ. He is also against the sin that
is apt to cleave to himself while he standeth in the presence of
God. I will wash mine hands in innocency, so will I compass thine
altar, O Lord. This man also chooses to be in the practical parts
of worship, if possible, for he knows that to have to do about
holy things sincerely is the way to be at the remotest distance
from sin. He chooses also to be with those holy ones that are
of the same mind with him against sin; for he knows that two are
better than one, and that a threefold cord is not easily broken.
Wherefore look to yourselves, you that do, or may be called to
suffer for religion: if you bend not yourselves against sin, if to
be revenged of sin be not the cause of your suffering, you cannot
be said to suffer for righteousness' sake. Take heed, therefore,
that something else be not an inducement to thee to suffer. A
man may suffer to save what he has: there is credit also and an
applause; there is shame to conform; there is carnal stoutness of
spirit; there is hatred of persecutors and scorn to submit; there
is fear of contempt and of the reproach of the people, &c. These
may be motives and arguments to a suffering state, and may really
be the ground of a man's being in the jail; though he cries out
in the meanwhile of popery, of superstition, and idolatry, and of
the errors that attend the common modes of the religions of the
world. I charge no man as though I knew any such thing by any; but
I suggest these things as things that are possible, and mention
them because I would have sufferers have a care of themselves;
and watch and pray, because no man can be upright here that is not
holy, that cannot pray, and watch, and deny himself for the love
that he has to righteousness. I said it before, and will say
it again, it is a rare thing to be set in downrightness of heart
against sin.

2. Is it for the sake of righteousness that thou sufferest? Then
it is because thou wouldest have righteousness promoted, set up,
and established in the world; also thou art afflicted at those
advantages that iniquity gets upon men, upon things, and against
thyself. "I beheld," said David, "the transgressors, and was
grieved; because men kept not thy word" (Psa 119:158). And again,
These are they that mourn for the abominations that are done among
men (Eze 9:4). There is a great deal of talk about religion, a
great deal of pleading for religion, namely, as to the formalities
of this and the other way.35 But to choose to be religious, that
I might be possessed with holiness, and to choose that religion
that is most apt to possess me with it, if I suffer for this, I
suffer for righteousness' sake. Wherefore say thus to thy soul,
thou that art like to suffer for righteousness, How is it with
the most inward parts of my soul? What is there? What designs,
desires, and reachings out are there? Why do I pray? Why do I read?
Why do I hear? Why do I haunt and frequent places and ordinances
appointed for worship? Is it because I love holiness? would promote
righteousness, because I love to see godliness show itself in
others, and because I would feel more of the power of it in myself?
If so, and if thou sufferest for thy profession, thou sufferest,
not only for righteousness, but also for righteousness' sake. Dost
thou thus practise, because thou wouldest be taught to do outward
acts of righteousness, and because thou wouldest provoke others to
do so too? Dost thou show to others how thou lovest righteousness,
by taking opportunities to do righteousness? How is it, dost thou
show most mercy to thy dog, 36 or to thine enemy, to thy swine,
or to the poor? Whose naked body hast thou clothed? Whose hungry
belly hast thou fed? Hast thou taken delight in being defrauded and
beguiled? Hast thou willingly sat down by the loss with quietness,
and been as if thou hadst not known, when thou hast been wronged,
defamed, abused, and all because thou wast not willing that
black-mouthed men should vilify and reproach religion upon thy
account (1 Cor 6:7)?

He that loveth righteousness will do thus, yea, and do it as unto
God, and of tenderness to the Word of God which he professeth. And
he that thinks to make seeing men believe, that when he suffereth,
he suffereth for righteousness' sake, and yet is void in his life
of moral goodness, and that has no heart to suffer and bear, and
put up, and pass by injuries in his conversation among his enemies
at home, is deceived.

There are some Scriptures that are as if they were out of date
among some professors, specially such as call for actual holiness
and acts of self-denial for God; but it will be found, at the
day of judgment, that they only are the peculiar people that are
"zealous of good works" (Titus 2:14). God help us, it is hard now
to persuade professors to come up to negative holiness, that is,
to leave undone that which is bad; and yet this of itself comes
far short of ones being found in practical goodness.

But this is the man that suffereth, when he suffereth for righteousness'
sake, that makes it his business, by all lawful means, according
to the capacity that God has put him in, to promote, set up, and
establish righteousness in the world; I say this is the man that
suffereth for righteousness' sake, that suffereth for so doing; and
I am sure that a life that is moral, when joined to the profession
of the faith of the things that are of the Spirit of God, is
absolutely necessary to the promoting of righteousness in the world.
Hence Peter tells them that suffer for righteousness' sake, that
they must have "a good conscience"--a good conscience towards God,
towards men, towards friends, towards enemies (1 Peter 3:14-16;
Acts 24:16; 23:1). They must have a good conscience in all
things, being willing, ready, desirous to live honestly, godly,
and righteously in this world, or else they cannot, though they may
suffer for the best doctrine under heaven, suffer for righteousness'
sake (Heb 13:18). Wherefore,

3. Is it for righteousness' sake that thou sufferest? then thy
design is the ruin of sin. This depends upon what was said before;
for he that strives against sin, that seeks to promote righteousness,
he designs the ruin of sin. "Be not," said Paul to the suffering
Romans, "overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good" (Rom 12:21).
To overcome evil with good is a hard task. To rail it down, to cry
it down, to pray kings, and parliaments, and men in authority to
put it down, this is easier than to use my endeavour to overcome
it with good, with doing of good, as I said before.37 And sin must
be overcome with good at home, before thy good can get forth of
doors38 to overcome evil abroad.

Abraham overcame evil with good, when he quieted the discontent of
Lot and his herdsmen, with allowing of them to feed their cattle
in the best of what God had given him (Gen 13:7,8).

David overcame evil with good, when he saved the life of his
bloody enemy that was fallen into his hand; also when he grieved
that any hurt should come to them that sought nothing so much as
his destruction. "They rewarded me," saith he, "evil for good, to
the spoiling of my soul. But as for me, when they were sick, my
clothing was sackcloth. I humbled my soul with fasting, I behaved
myself as though he had been my friend or brother; I bowed down
heavily, as one that mourneth for his mother." This is to overcome
evil with good (Psa 35:12-14).

Job saith concerning his enemy, that he did not rejoice when evil
found him; "neither have I," said he, "suffered my mouth to sin by
wishing a curse to his soul." He means he did the quite contrary,
and so overcame evil with good (Job 31:29,30).

Elisha overcame evil with good, when he received the men that came
for his life, and had them where he might feast, and comfort them,
and sent them home in peace to their master (2 Kings 6:19-23).

The New Testament also is full of this, both in exhortations and
examples, In exhortations where it is said, resist not evil, that
is, with evil, but overcome evil with good (Prov 24:29). "But
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also.--And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him
twain. Give to him that asketh thee; and from him that would borrow
of thee, turn not thou away.--Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children
of your Father which is in heaven, for he maketh his sun to rise
on the evil, and on the good--on the just, and on the unjust"
(Matt 5:39-45). "Bless them that persecute you: bless and curse
not" (Rom 12:14). "Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing, but contrariwise, blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto
called, that ye should inherit a blessing" (1 Peter 3:9; Rom 12:14).
This is righteousness--these are righteous courses. And as these
are preceptively propounded, so they were as practically followed
by them that were eminently godly in the primitive church.

"We are fools for Christ's sake," said Paul, "we are despised, we
are hungry, thirsty, naked, and buffeted.--Being reviled, we bless;
being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat: we are
made as the filth of the earth, and are the offscouring of all
things unto this day" (1 Cor 4:10-13). This is overcoming of evil
with good, and he that has chosen to himself that religion that
teaches these things, and that loves that religion because it so
teacheth him; if he suffereth for it, he suffereth for righteousness'
sake.

4. He that suffereth for righteousness' sake, will carry righteousness
whithersoever he goes. Neither the enemy, nor thy sufferings,
shall be able to take righteousness from thee. Righteousness must
be thy chamber mate, thy bed companion, thy walking mate: it is
that without which thou wilt be so uncouth, as if thou couldest
not live (Psa 26: 25:21).

Paul in his sufferings would have righteousness with him, for it
must be as it were his armour-bearer; yea, his very armour itself
(2 Cor 6:7). It is an excellent saying of Job, "I put on righteousness,
and it clothed me; my judgment was as a robe and a diadem. I was
eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame; I was a father to
the poor," &c. (Job 29:11-16). "Princes," said David also, "did
sit and speak against me, but thy servant did meditate in thy
statues" (Psa 119:23). A man that loves righteousness doth as
Abraham did with his Sarah, carry it every where with him, though
he goes, because of that, in danger of his life. Righteousness!
It is the only intimate that a Christian has. It is that by which
he takes his measures, that with which he consults, with respect
to what he doth, or is to do, in the world. "Thy testimonies,"
said David also, "are my delight, and my counsellors." The men of
my counsel, in the margin (Psa 119:24).

David! He was the man of affliction; the suffering man in his day;
but in all places where he came, he had righteousness, the law and
godly practice with him. It was his counsellor, as he was a man,
a saint, a king. I dare say, for the man that suffers righteousness
to be rent away from him by the violence and rage of men, and
that casts it away, as David did Saul's armour, that he may secure
himself; he has no great love for righteousness, nor to the cross
for righteousness' sake. "My righteousness I hold fast," said Job,
"and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long
as I live" (Job 27:6). What? part with righteousness! A righteous
Lord! A righteous Word! A righteous profession! A righteous life!
to sleep in a whole skin: the Lord forbid it me, and all that he
has counted worthy to be called by his name. Let us carry it with
us from the bed to the cross, and then it shall carry us from
thence to the crown. Let it be our companion to prison and death,
then shall we show that we are lovers of righteousness, and that
we choose to suffer for righteousness' sake.

5. Dost thou suffer for righteousness' sake? why then,
thy righteousness is not diminished, but rather increased by thy
sufferings. Righteousness thriveth best in affliction, the more
afflicted, the more holy man; the more persecuted, the more shining
man (Acts 6:15). The prison is the furnace, thy graces are the silver
and the gold; wherefore, as the silver and the gold are refined
by the fire, and so made more to show their native brightness, so
the Christian that hath, and that loveth righteousness, and that
suffereth for its sake, is by his sufferings refined and made
more righteous, and made more Christian, more godly (Zech 13:9).
Some, indeed, when they come there, prove lead, iron, tin, and
at the best, but the dross of silver; and so are fit for nothing,
but there to be left and consumed, and to bear the badge, if ever
they come from thence, of reprobate silver from the mouth and
sentence of their neighbours (Eze 22:18-22; Jer 6:28-30). But when
I, says Job, am tried, "I shall come forth as gold" (Job 23:10).

When Saul had cast one javelin at David, it made him walk wisely
in all his ways. But when he added to his first fury, plots to take
away his life, then David behaved himself yet more wisely (1 Sam
18:10-30). The hotter the rage and fury of men are against righteous
ways, the more those that love righteousness grow therein. For
they are concerned for it, not to hide it, but to make it spangle;
not to extinguish it, but to greaten it, and to show the excellency
of it in all its features, and in all its comely proportion. Now
such an one will make straight steps for his feet, "let that which
is lame be turned out of the way" (Heb 12:13). Now he shows to
all men what faith is, by charity, by self-denial, by meekness,
by gentleness, by long-suffering, by patience, by love to enemies,
and by doing good to them that hate us; now he walketh upon his
high places. Yea, will not now admit that so slovenly a conversation
should come within his doors, as did use to haunt his house in
former times. Now it is Christmas,39 now it is suffering time, now
we must keep holy day every day. The reason is, for that a man,
when he suffereth for Christ, is set upon a hill, upon a stage,
as in a theatre, to play a part for God in the world. And you
know when men are to play their parts upon a stage, they count
themselves, if possible, more bound to circumspection; and that
for the credit of their master, the credit of their art, and the
credit of themselves. For then the eyes of every body are fixed,
they gape and stare upon them (Psa 22:17). And a trip here is as
bad as a fall in another place. Also now God himself looks on. Yea,
he laugheth, as being pleased to see a good behaviour attending
the trial of the innocent.

(1.) He that suffereth for righteousness' sake suffereth for his
goodness, and he is now to labour by works and ways to convince
the world that he suffereth as such an one. (2.) He that suffereth
for righteousness' sake has many that are weak to strengthen by his
sweet carriages under the cross, wherefore he had need to exceed
in virtue. (3.) He also is by well-doing to put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men, he had need be curious and circumspect
in all his actions. (4.) He is to come in, and to be a judge,
and to condemn, by his faith and patience in his sufferings, the
world, with his Lord and fellows, at the appearing of Jesus Christ;
he had need be holy himself. This, therefore, is the fit sign of
suffering for righteousness' sake (1 Cor 6:1-5; Heb 11:7; 2 Thess
1:5,6; 1 Peter 4:3-5).

6. He that suffereth, not only for righteousness, but also for
righteousness' sake, will not exchange his cause, though for it
in a jail, for all the ease and pleasure in the world. They that
suffered for righteousness' sake of old, were tempted before they
were sawn asunder (Heb 11). Tempted, that is, allured, to come out
of their present sufferings, and leave their faith and profession
in irons behind them. Tempted with promises of promotion, of ease,
of friendship, of favour with men. As the Devil said to Christ,
so persecutors of old did use to make great promises to sufferers,
if they would fall down and worship. But his is alone as if they
should say, Butcher, make away with your righteousness,40 and a
good conscience, and you shall find the friendship of the world.
For there is no way to kill a man's righteousness but by his own
consent. This, Job's wife knew full well, hence she tempted him
to lay violent hands upon his own integrity (Job 2:9).

The Devil, nor men of the world can kill thy righteousness or love
to it, but by thy own hand; or separate that and thee asunder,
without thine own act. Nor will he that doth indeed suffer for the
sake of it, or of love he bears thereto, be tempted to exchange
it for the goods of all the world. It is a sad sight to see a man
that has been suffering for righteousness, restored to his former
estate, while the righteousness for which he suffered, remains under
locks and irons, and is exposed to the scorn, contempt, reproach
of the world, and trodden under the foot of men.41 "It is better,"
said Paul, "for me to die, than that any man should make my glorying
void." And it had been a hundred times better for that man, if he
had never known the way of righteousness, than after he has known
it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto him.


The striving is, in persecution, for righteousness; to wit, whether
it shall be set up, or pulled down. The sufferer, he is for setting
up, and the persecutors are for pulling down. Thus they strive
for the mastery. Now, if a man stands by his righteousness, and
holds fast his good profession, then is righteousness set up;
nor can it, so long, be pulled down. Hence, so long a man is said
to overcome; and overcome he doth, though he be killed for his
profession. But if he starts back, gives place, submits, recants,
or denieth any longer to own that good thing that he professed,
and exposed himself to suffering for; then he betrays his cause,
his profession, his conscience, his righteousness, his soul, and
all; for he has delivered up his profession to be murdered before
his face: A righteous man falling down before the wicked, is as a
troubled fountain, and a corrupt spring (Prov 25:26). But this, I
hope, will not he do that loveth righteousness, and that suffereth
for righteousness' sake. I do not say but that a man may slip here,
with Peter, Origen, Hierom, Cranmer, Baynham, Ormis,42 and other
good folk; but be he one of the right kind, a lover of righteousness
indeed, he will return, and take revenge upon himself in a godly
way, for so ungodly a fact.

7. He that suffereth not only for righteousness, but also for
righteousness sake, is not so wedded to his own notions as to slight
or overlook the good that is in his neighbour. But righteousness
he loves wherever he finds it, though it be in him that smiteth
him (Psa 141:5). Yea, he will own and acknowledge it for the only
thing that is of beauty and glory in the world. With the excellent
in the earth is all such a man's delight. Wherefore I put a difference
betwixt suffering for an opinion and suffering for righteousness;
as I put a difference between suffering for righteousness and
suffering for righteousness' sake.

If righteousness, if the stamp of God, if divine authority, is
not found upon that thing which I hold, let men never suffer for
it under the notion of righteousness. If sin, if superstition,
if idolatry, if derogation from the wisdom of Christ, and the
authority and perfection of his Word, be not found in, nor joined
to that thing that I disown in worship, let me never open my mouth
against it. I had rather fall in with, and be an associate of a
righteous man that has no true grace, than with a professor that
has no righteousness. It is said of the young man, though he went
away from Christ, that he looked upon him and loved him (Mark
10:17-22). But it is not said that ever he loved Judas. I know
that the righteousness for which a good man suffereth, is not
then embraced of the world, for that at such a time it is under
a cloud. But yet there is righteousness also in the world, and
wherever I see it, it is of a high esteem with me. David acknowledged
some of his enemies to be more righteous than he acknowledged
some of his servants to be (2 Sam 4:9-11; 3:31-35). It is a brave
thing to have righteousness, as righteousness, to be the top-piece
in mine affections. The reason why Christ was anointed with the oil
of gladness above his fellows, was, because he loved righteousness,
and hated iniquity more than they (Heb. 1:9). Love to righteousness
flows from golden graces, and is that, and that only, that can
make a man capable of suffering, in our sense, for righteousness'
sake.

8. He that suffereth not only for righteousness, but also for
righteousness' sake, will take care that his sufferings be so
managed with graciousness of words and actions, that it may live
when he is dead; yea, and it will please him too, if righteousness
flourishes, though by his loss. Hence it is that Paul said, he
rejoiced in his suffering, Colossians 1:24; namely, because others
got good thereby. And that he said, "Yea, and if I be offered upon
the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with
you all" (Phil 2:17). But why rejoice in this? Why, because though
his sufferings were to the distressing of his flesh, yet they
were to the refreshing, comfort, and stability of others. This
was it also that made him jostle with the false brethren among
the churches; to wit, "that the truth of the gospel might continue
with them" (Gal 2:5).

When a man shall run the hazard of the ruin of what he has, and is,
for righteousness, for the good and benefit of the church of God;
that man, he managing himself by the rule, if he suffers for so
doing, suffers not only for righteousness, but also for righteousness'
sake. "I endure all things," said Paul, "for the elect's sake,
that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus
with eternal glory" (2 Tim 2:10). Here was love, you will say, to
persons; and I will say also, to things; to all the righteousnesses
of God that are revealed in the world, that all the elect might
enjoy them to their eternal comfort and glory, by Christ Jesus.
For "whether we be afflicted," says he, "it is for your consolation
and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the same
sufferings which we also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it
is for your consolation and salvation" (2 Cor 1:6).

The end of a man and his design, if that be to promote righteousness,
he using lawful means to accomplish it, is greatly accepted of
God by Christ; and it is a sign he is a lover of righteousness;
and that if he suffereth for so doing, he suffereth not for
well-doing, only as to matter of fact, but also for his love to
the good thing done, and for its sake.

I have now done with that first head that was to be spoken to,
as touching the law and testament; which we have said was to be
understood of the will of God spoken of in the text: "Let them
that suffer according to the will of God," that is, according to
his law and testament. Now we have showed what it is to suffer
according to that; we come to another thing, namely:--

[THE WILL OF GOD MEANS HIS ORDER AND DESIGNMENT.]

Second, That by the will of God, we also understand his order
and designment. For the will of God is active, to dispose of his
people, as well as preceptive, to show unto us our duty. He then
that suffers for righteousness' sake, as he suffers for that which
is good as to the matter of it, and as he suffers for that which
is good, after that manner as becomes that truth for which he
suffereth; so he that thus suffereth, suffereth by the order and
designment of God. That, then, is the next thing that is to be
spoken to, namely:--

God is the great orderer of the battle that is managed in the world
against antichrist. Hence that battle is called, "The battle of
that great day of God Almighty" (Rev 16:14). It is not what enemies
will, nor what they are resolved upon, but what God will, and what
God appoints; that shall be done. This doctrine Christ teacheth
when he saith, "Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and
not one of them is forgotten before God? But even the very hairs
of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more
value than many sparrows" (Luke 12:6,7). He speaks in the verses
before of killing, and bids them that they should not be afraid
for that. "Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after
that have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom
ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he hath killed hath power
to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him." Then he leads
them to the consideration of this, that the will of God governs,
and disposes of his [people] to suffering; as well as declares to
them for what, and how they should suffer, saying, "Are not five
sparrows sold for two farthings," &c.

Also in Isaiah 8:9,10 and in Isaiah 2:12,13, you have in sum the
same thing inserted again. But we will not stay upon proof, but
will proceed to demonstration hereof.

Pharaoh said he would, ay, that he would, but he could not touch
so much as a thread or a rag of Israel, because the will of God
was in that thing contrary to him. Saul said that he would have
David, and to that end would search for him among the thousands of
Judah; but David was designed for another purpose, and therefore
Saul must go without him (1 Sam 23:25) Rabshakeh said that he was
come from Assyria to Jerusalem to make "Judah eat their own dung,
and drink their own piss" (Isa 36:12). But God said he should not
shoot an arrow there. And it came to pass as God had said (Isa
37:33; 2 Kings 18; 2 Chron 28). Jeremiah and Baruch's enemies would
have killed them, but they could not, for God hid them. How many
times had the Jews a mind to have destroyed Jesus Christ; but they
could not touch a hair of his head until his hour was come.

Those also that bound themselves in a curse, that they would
neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul, were forced to
be foresworn, for the will of God was not that Paul should die as
yet (Acts 23:12). This therefore should be well considered of God's
church, in the cloudy and dark day. "All his saints are in thy
hand" (Deut 33:3). It is not the way of God to let the enemies of
God's church do what they will; no, the Devil himself can devour
but "whom he may" (1 Peter 5:8). And as no enemy can bring suffering
upon a man when the will of God is otherwise, so no man can save
himself out of their hands when God will deliver him up for his
glory. It remaineth, then, that we be not much afraid of men, nor
yet be foolishly bold; but that we wait upon our God in the way
of righteousness, and the use of those means which his providence
offereth to us for our safety; and that we conclude that our whole
dispose, as to liberty or suffering, lieth in the will of God,
and that we shall, or shall not suffer, even as it pleaseth him.
For,

First, God has appointed WHO shall suffer. Suffering comes not
by chance, or by the will of man, but by the will and appointment
of God. "Let no man," said Paul, "be moved by these afflictions;
for yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto" (1 Thess
3:3). We are apt to forget God when affliction comes, and to think
it a strange thing that those that fear God should suffer indeed
(1 Peter 4:12). But we should not, for we suffer by the will and
appointment of God. Hence they under the altar were bid to rest
for a while, even until their fellow-servants also, and their
brethren that should be killed--mark that--"should be killed, as
they were, should be fulfilled" (Rev 6:11). Wherefore, suffering
for righteousness and for righteousness' sake, is by the will of
God. God has appointed who shall suffer. That is the first.

Second, As God has appointed who shall suffer, so he has appointed
WHEN they shall suffer for his truth in the world. Sufferings
for such and such a man are timed, as to when he shall be tried
for his faith. Hence, when Paul was afraid, at Corinth, that the
heathens would fall about his ears, the Lord spake to him by night
in a vision, saying, "Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy
peace; for I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt
thee" (Acts 18:9,10). His time of suffering was not yet come there.
It is also said concerning Jesus Christ, that even then when "they
sought to take him, no man laid hands on him, because his hour
was not yet come" (John 7:30). The times, then, and the seasons,
even for the sufferings of the people of God, are not in the hands
of their enemies, but in the hand of God; as David said, "My times
are in thy hand." By the will of God, then, it is that such shall
suffer at, but not until, that time. But,

Third, As God has appointed who and when, so he has appointed WHERE
this, that, or the other good man shall suffer. Moses and Elias,
when they appeared on the holy mount, told Jesus of the sufferings
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. Jerusalem was the place
assigned for Christ to suffer at; also, there must the whole
of his sufferings be accomplished (Luke 9:30,31). The saints are
sprinkled by the hand of God here and there, as salt is sprinkled
upon meat to keep it from stinking. And as they are thus sprinkled,
that they may season the earth; so, accordingly, where they must
suffer is also appointed for the better confirming of the truth.
Christ said, it could not be that a prophet should "perish out of
Jerusalem" (Luke 13:33). But why could it not be that they should
perish other where? Were there no enemies but in Jerusalem? Were
there no good men but at Jerusalem? No, no; that was not the reason.
The reason was, for that God had appointed that they should suffer
there. So then, who, when, and where, is at the will of God, and
they, accordingly, are ordered by that will.

Fourth, As God has appointed who, when, and where, so he has also
appointed WHAT KIND of sufferings this or that saint shall undergo,
at this place and at such a time. God said that he would show Paul
beforehand how great things he should suffer for his sake (Acts
9:16). And it is said that Christ did signify to Peter beforehand
"by what death he should glorify God" (John 21:19). When Herod
had beheaded John the Baptist, and when the Jews had crucified
Christ, it is said that they had but fulfilled what was "written
of them" (Mark 9:13; Acts 13:29). Our sufferings, as to the nature
of them, are all writ down in God's book; and though the writing
seem as unknown characters to us, yet God understands them very
well. Some of them they shall kill and crucify, and some of them
they shall scourge in their synagogue, "and persecute them from
city to city" (Matt 23:34). Shall God, think you, say, some of them
they shall serve thus, and some of them they shall do so to; and
yet not allot which some to this, and which to that, and which to
the other trial?

Doubtless our sufferings fall by the will of God unto us, as they
fell of old upon the people of Jerusalem. It was appointed by God
who of them should die of hunger, who with sword, who should go
into captivity, and who should be eaten up of beasts (Jer 15:2,3).
So is the case here, namely, as God has appointed who, when, where,
and the like, so he has, also, what manner of sufferings this or
that good man shall undergo for his name. Let it then be concluded,
that hitherto it appears, that the sufferings of saints are ordered
and disposed by the will of God. But,

Fifth, As all this is determined by the will of God, so it is also
appointed FOR WHAT TRUTH this or that saint shall suffer this or
that kind of affliction. Every saint has his course, his work,
and his testimony, as is allotted him of God (Mark 13:34). John
had a course, a testimony to fulfil for God (Acts 13:25), and so
had holy Paul (2 Tim 4:6,7), and so has every saint: also, he that
is to suffer has his truth appointed him to suffer for. Christ
had a truth peculiar to himself to bear witness to in a way of
suffering (Mark 14:61,62). John had a truth peculiar to himself
to bear witness to in a way of suffering (Mark 6:17,18). Stephen
had also a truth, divers from them both, to which he bare a holy
testimony, and for which he bravely died (Acts 7:51-53).

If you read the book of Acts and Monuments, you may see a goodly
variety as to this; and yet in all a curious harmony. Some are
there said to suffer for the Godhead, some for the manhood, some
for the ordinances of Christ, and some laid down their lives
for the brethren. And thus far we see that he that suffers for
righteousness' sake, suffers, in this sense, according to the will
of God.

Sixth, As it is appointed who, when, where, what kind, and for what
truth, by the will of God, this and that saint should suffer; so
also it is appointed BY WHOSE HAND this or that man shall suffer
for this or that truth. It was appointed that Moses and Israel
should suffer by the hand of Pharaoh. And for this very purpose,
said God, have I raised thee up, that is, to be a persecutor,
and to reap the fruits thereof (Exo 9:16). It was also determined
that Christ should suffer by the hand of Herod and Pontius Pilate;
"For of a truth," said they, "against thy holy child Jesus--both
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel, were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and
thy counsel determined before to be done" (Acts 4:27).

These are great instances, from which we may gather how all these
things are ordered from thence down hitherto. For if a sparrow
falls not to the ground without God, she shall not be killed
without God; not by he knows not who. And if a Christian man is
better than many sparrows, it follows, that God concerns himself
more with, for, and about him than with, for, or about many sparrows.
It follows, therefore, in right reason, that as the person who is
appointed to be the sufferer, so the persons who are appointed to
be the rod and sword thereby to afflict withal. Thus far, therefore,
the will of God is it that ordereth and disposeth of us and of
our sufferings.

Seventh, As all these pass through the hand of God, and come not
to us but by his will, so HOW as also LONG is really determined
as any of them all. It is not in man, but God, to set the time
how long the rod of the wicked shall rest upon the lot of the
righteous. Abraham must be informed of this. "Abraham," says God,
"know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that
is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them
four hundred years" (Gen 15:13). So the thraldom of Israel in Babylon
was not only in the general appointed, but the time prefixed, how
long (Jer 25:11,12; 29:10). The time of the beast's reign and of
the witnesses walking in sackcloth are punctually fixed, and that
beyond which they cannot go (Rev 11, 12, 13).

I know these are generals, and respect the church in the bulk of
it, and not particular persons. But, as was hinted afore, we must
argue from the greater to the lesser, that is, from four hundred
years to ten days, from ten days to three, and so from the church
in general to each particular member, and to the time and nature
of their sufferings (Rev 2:10; Hosea 6:2; Acts 23:11).

And thus, in a word or two, I have finished the first two parts
of the text, and showed you what there is in Peter's counsel and
advice; and showed you also, to whom his advice is given: in which
last, as you see, I have showed you both what the will of God is,
and what to suffer according to it. And particularly, I have, in
a few words, handled this last, to show you that our sufferings
are ordered and disposed by him, that you might always, when you
come into trouble for his name, not stagger nor be at a loss, but
be stayed, composed, and settled in your minds, and say, "The will
of the Lord be done" (Acts 21:14). I will also say unto you this
by the way, that the will of God doth greatly work, even to order
and dispose of the spirits of Christians, in order to willingness,
disposedness, readiness, and resignation of ourselves to the mind
of God. For with respect to this were those words last recited
spoken. Paul saw that he had a call to go up to Jerusalem, there
to bear his testimony for Christ and his gospel; but those unto
whom he made know his purpose entreated him, with much earnestness,
not to go up thither, for that, as they believed, it would endanger
his life. But he answereth, What, mean ye to weep, and to break
my heart? for I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die
at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. And when he would
not be persuaded, says Luke, we ceased, saying, "The will of the
Lord be done." From what has been thus discoursed, many things will
follow; as,

1. That the rod, as well as the child, is God's; persecutors, as
well as the persecuted, are his, and he has his own designs upon
both. He has raised them up, and he has ordered them for himself,
and for that work that he has for them to do. Hence Habakkuk,
speaking of the church's enemies, saith, "Thou hast ordained them
for judgment; and, O mighty God, thou hast established them for
correction" (Hab 1:12). And, therefore, they are in other places
called the rod of God's anger; his staff (Isa 10:5), his hand;
his sword (Psa 17:13,14).

Indeed, to be thus disposed of, is a sad lot; the lot is not fallen
to them in pleasant places, they have not the goodly heritage;
but the judgments of God are a great deep. The thing formed may
not say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? To be
appointed, to be ordained, to be established to be a persecutor,
and a troubler of God's church--O tremendous judgment! O amazing
anger!

Three things the people of God should learn from hence.

(1.) Learn to pity and bewail the condition of the enemy; I know
thou canst not alter the counsel of God; appointed they are,
established they are for their work, and do it they must and shall.
But yet it becomes them that see their state, and that their day
is coming, to pity and bewail their condition, yea, and to pray
for them too; for who knows whether it is determined that they
should remain implacable to the end, as Herod; or whether they
may through grace obtain repentance of their doings, with Saul.
And I say again, if thy prayer should have a casting hand in the
conversion of any of them, it would be sweet to thy thoughts when
the scene is over.

(2.) Never grudge them their present advantages. "Fret not thyself
because of evil men, neither be thou envious at the workers of
iniquity" (Prov 24:19). Fret not, though they spoil thy resting-place.
It is God that has bidden them do it, to try thy faith and patience
thereby. Wish them no ill with what they get of thine; it is their
wages for their work, and it will appear to them ere long that
they have earned it dearly. Their time is to rejoice but as in a
moment, in what thus is gotten by them; and then they, not repenting,
are to perish for ever, like their own dung (Job 20:5-7). Poor man,
thou that hast thy time to be afflicted by them, that thy golden
graces may shine the more, thou art in the fire, and they blow
the bellows. But wouldest thou change places with them? Wouldest
thou sit upon their place of ease? Dost thou desire to be with
them (Prov 24:1)? O rest thyself contented; in thy patience possess
thy soul, and pity and bewail them in the condition in which they
are.

(3.) Bless God that thy lot did fall on the other side, namely, to
be one that should know the truth, profess it, suffer for it, and
have grace to bear thee up thereunder, to God's glory, and thy
eternal comfort. This honour have not all his saints; all are not
counted worthy thus to suffer shame for his name. Do this, I say,
though they get all, and leave thee nothing but the shirt on thy
back, the skin on thy bones, or an hole in the ground to be put
in (Heb 11:23-26).

2. Labour to be patient under this mighty hand of God, and be not
hasty to say, When will the rod be laid aside? mind thou thy duty,
which is to let patience have its perfect work. And bear the
indignation of the Lord, because thou hast sinned against him,
until he please to awake, to arise, and to execute judgment for
thee (Micah 7:9). But to pass this. Are things thus ordered?
then this should teach us that there is a cause. The rod is not
gathered without a cause; the rod is fore-determined, because the
sin of God's people is foreseen, and ofttimes the nature of the
sin, and the anger of the Father, is seen in the fashion of the
rod. The rod of my anger, saith God. A bitter and hasty nation
must be brought against Jerusalem; an enemy fierce and cruel must
be brought against the land of Israel. Their sins called for such
a rod, for their iniquities were grievous (Hab 1:6).

This should teach us with all earnestness to be sorry for our sins,
and to do what we can to prevent these things, by falling upon
our face in a way of prayer before God. If we would shorten such
days, when they come upon us, let us be lovers of righteousness,
and get more of the righteousness of faith, and of compliance
with the whole will of God into our hearts. Then I say, the days
shall be shortened, or we fare as well, because the more harmless
and innocent we are, and suffer, the greater will our wages, our
reward, and glory be, when pay-day shall come; and what if we wait
a little for that?

These things are sent to better God's people, and to make them
white, to refine them as silver, and to purge them as gold, and
to cause that they that bear some fruit, may bring forth more: we
are afflicted, that we may grow (John 15:2). It is also the will
of God, that they that go to heaven should go thither hardly or
with difficulty. The righteous shall scarcely be saved. That is,
they shall, but yet with great difficulty, that it may be the
sweeter. Now that which makes the way to heaven so strait, so
narrow, so hard, is the rod, the sword, the persecutor, that lies
in the way, that marks where our haunt is, that mars our path,
digs a pit, and that sets a net, a snare for us in the way (1 Sam
23:22; Job 30:12-14; Psa 9:15; 31:4; 35:7; 119:110; 140:5; 142:3).

This, I say, is that which puts us to it, but it is to try, as I
said, our graces, and to make heaven the sweeter to us. To come
frighted and hard pursued thither, will make the safety there the
more with exceeding gladness to be embraced. And I say, get thy
heart yet more possessed with the power of godliness; that the love
of righteousness may be yet more with thee. For this blessedness,
this happiness, he shall be sure of, that suffereth for righteousness'
sake.

3. Since the rod is God's as well as the child, let us not look
upon our troubles as if they came from, and were managed only by
hell. It is true, a persecutor has a black mark upon him, but yet
the Scriptures say that all the ways of the persecutor are God's
(Dan 5:23). Wherefore as we should, so again we should not,
be afraid of men: we should be afraid of them, because they will
hurt us; but we should not be afraid of them, as if they were let
loose to do to us, and with us, what they will. God's bridle is
upon them, God's hook is in their nose: yea, and God has determined
the bounds of their rage, and if he lets them drive his church into
the sea of troubles, it shall be but up to the neck, and so far
it may go, and not be drowned (2 Kings 19:28; Isa 37:29; 8:7,8).
I say the Lord has hold of them, and orders them; nor do they
at any time come out against his people but by his licence and
commission how far to go, and where to stop. And now for two or
three objections:--

1. Object. But may we not fly in a time of persecution? Your
pressing upon us, that persecution is ordered and managed by God,
makes us afraid to fly.

Answ. First, having regard to what was said afore about a call to
suffer; thou mayest do in this even as it is in thy heart. If it is
in thy heart to fly, fly: if it be in thy heart to stand, stand.
Any thing but a denial of the truth. He that flies, has warrant
to do so; he that stands, has warrant to do so. Yea, the same man
may both fly and stand, as the call and working of God with his
heart may be. Moses fled (Exo 2:15), Moses stood (Heb 11:27).
David fled (1 Sam 19:12), David stood (24:8). Jeremiah fled (Jer
37:11,12), Jeremiah stood (38:17). Christ withdrew himself (Luke
9:10), Christ stood (John 18:1-8). Paul fled (2 Cor 11:33), Paul
stood (Acts 20:22,23).

There are therefore few rules in this case. The man himself is
best able to judge concerning his present strength, and what weight
this or that argument has upon his heart to stand or fly. I should
be loath to impose upon any man in these things; only, if thou
fliest, take two or three cautions with thee:--

(1.) Do not fly out of a slavish fear, but rather because flying is
an ordinance of God, opening a door for the escape of some, which
door is opened by God's providence, and the escape countenanced
by God's Word (Matt 10:23).

(2.) When thou art fled, do as much good as thou canst in all
quarters where thou comest, for therefore the door was opened to
thee, and thou bid to make thy escape (Acts 8:1-5).

(3.) Do not think thyself secure when thou art fled; it was
providence that opened the door, and the Word that did bid thee
escape: but whither, and wherefore, that thou knowest not yet.
Uriah the prophet fled into Egypt, because there dwelt men that
were to take him, that he might be brought again to Jerusalem to
die there (Jer 26:21).

(4.) Shouldest thou fly from where thou art, and be taken in another
place; the most that can be made of it--thy taking the opportunity
to fly, as was propounded at first--can be but this, thou wast
willing to commit thyself to God in the way of his providence, as
other good men have done, and thy being now apprehended has made
thy call clear to suffer here or there, the which before thou wert
in the dark about.

(5.) If, therefore, when thou hast fled, thou art taken, be not
offended at God or man: not at God, for thou art his servant, thy
life and thy all are his; not at man, for he is but God's rod, and
is ordained, in this, to do thee good. Hast thou escaped? Laugh.
Art thou taken? Laugh. I mean, be pleased which way soever things
shall go, for that the scales are still in God's hand.

(6.) But fly not, in flying, from religion; fly not, in flying,
for the sake of a trade; fly not, in flying, that thou mayest have
ease for the flesh: this is wicked, and will yield neither peace
nor profit to thy soul; neither now, nor at death, nor at the day
of judgment.

2. Object. But if I fly, some will blame me: what must I do now?

Answ. And so many others if thou standest; fly not, therefore, as
was said afore, out of a slavish fear; stand not, of a bravado.
Do what thou dost in the fear of God, guiding thyself by his Word
and providence; and as for this or that man's judgment, refer thy
case to the judgment of God.

3. Object. But if I be taken and suffer, my cause is like to be
clothed with scandals, slanders, reproaches, and all manner of
false, and evil speakings; what must I do?

Answ. Saul charged David with rebellion (1 Sam 22:8,13). Amos was
charged with conspiring against the king (Amos 7:10). Daniel was
charged with despising the king; and so also were the three children
(Dan 6:13; 3:12). Jesus Christ himself was accused of perverting
the nation, of forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, and of saying
that himself was Christ a king (Luke 23:2). These things therefore
have been. But,

(1.) Canst thou, after a due examination of thyself, say that
as to these things thou art innocent and clear? I say, will thy
conscience justify thee here? Hast thou made it thy business to
give unto God the things that are God's, and unto Caesar the things
that are his, according as God has commanded? If so, matter not
what men shall say, nor with what lies and reproaches they slander
thee, but for these things count thyself happy. Blessed are ye,
when men shall revile you--and shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely (lying) for my sake (saith Christ). Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted
they the prophets which were before you (Matt 5:11,12). Comfort
thyself therefore in the innocency of thy soul, and say, I am
counted a rebel, and yet am loyal; I am counted a deceiver, and
yet am true (1 Sam 24:8-12, 2 Cor 6:8). Also refer thy cause to the
day of judgment; for if thou canst rejoice at the thoughts that
thou shalt be cleared of all slanders and evil speakings then,
that will bear up thy heart as to what thou mayest suffer now.
The answer of a good conscience will carry a man through hell to
heaven. Count these slanders part of thy sufferings, and those
for which God will give thee a reward, because thou art innocent,
and for that they are laid upon thee for thy profession's sake.
But if thou be guilty, look to thyself; I am no comforter of such.

[THIRD, THE GOOD EFFECT OF COMMITTING THE SOUL TO GOD'S KEEPING.]

I come now to speak to the third and last part of the text, namely,
of the good effect that will certainly follow to those that, after
a due manner, shall take the advice afore given. "Let them that
suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator."

Two things from the last clause of the text lie yet before us. And
they are they by which will be shown what good effect will follow
to those that suffer according to the will of God, and that commit
their souls to his keeping. 1. Such will find him to themselves a
Creator. 2. They will find him a faithful Creator. "Let them commit
the keeping of their souls to him, as unto a faithful Creator."

In this phrase, a Faithful Creator, behold the wisdom of the Holy
Ghost, how fitly and to the purpose he speaketh. King is a great
title, and God is sometimes called a King; but he is not set forth
by this title here, but by the title of a Creator; for it is not
always in the power of a king to succour and relieve his subjects,
that are suffering for his crown and dignity. Father is a sweet
title--a title that carrieth in it an intimation of a great deal
of bowels and compassion, and God is often set forth also by this
title in the holy Scriptures. But so he is not here, but rather
as a Creator. For a father, a compassionate father, cannot always
help, succour, or relieve his children, though he knows they are
under affliction! Oh! but a Creator can. Wherefore, I say, he is
set forth here under the title of Creator.

FIRST, A Creator! nothing can die under a Creator's hands. A Creator
can sustain all. A Creator can, as a Creator, do what he pleases.
"The Lord, the everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the
earth, fainteth not, neither is weary" (Isa 40:28).

The cause of God, for which his people suffer, had been dead and
buried a thousand years ago, had it not been in the hand of a
Creator. The people that have stood by his cause had been out of
both as to persons, name, and remembrance, had they not been in
the hand of a Creator. Who could have hoped, when Israel was going
in, even into the mouth of the Red Sea, that ever his cause, or
that people, should have revived again. A huge host of the Egyptians
were behind them, and nothing but death before and on every hand
of them; but they lived, they flourished, they outlived their
enemies, for they were in the hand of a Creator.

Who could have hoped that Israel should have returned again from
the land, from the hand, and from under the tyranny of the king
of Babylon? They could not deliver themselves from going thither,
they could not preserve themselves from being diminished when they
came there, their power was gone, they were in captivity, their
distance from home was far, their enemies possessed their land,
their city of defence was ruined, and their houses burned down
to the ground; and yet they came home again: there is nothing
impossible to a Creator.

Who could have thought that the three children could have lived in
a fiery furnace? that Daniel could have been safe among the lions?
that Jonah could have come home to his country, when he was in
the whale's belly? or that our Lord should have risen again from
the dead? But what is impossible to a Creator?

This, therefore, is a rare consideration for those to let their
hearts be acquainted with that suffer according to the will of
God, and that have committed the keeping of their souls to him in
well-doing. They have a Creator to maintain and uphold their cause,
a Creator to oppose its opposers. And hence it is said, all that
burden themselves with Jerusalem "shall be cut in pieces, though
all the people of the earth be gathered together against it" (Zech
12:3).

SECOND, A Creator! A Creator can not only support a dying cause,
but also fainting spirits. For as he fainteth not, nor is weary,
so "he giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might
he increaseth strength" (Isa 40:29). He is the God of the spirits
of all flesh, and has the life of the spirit of his people in his
own hand. Spirits have their being from him; he is the Father of
spirits. Spirits are made strong by him, nor can any crush that
spirit that God the Creator will uphold.

Is it not a thing amazing to see one poor inconsiderable man, in
a spirit of faith and patience, overcome all the threatenings,
cruelties, afflictions, and sorrows, that a whole world can lay upon
him? None can quail43 him, none can crush him, none can bend down
his spirit. None can make him to forsake what he has received of
God--a commandment to hold fast. His holy, harmless, and profitable
notions, because they are spiced with grace, yield to him more
comfort, joy, and peace, and do kindle in his soul so goodly
a fire of love to, and zeal for God, that all the waters of the
world shall never be able to quench.

Ay, say some, that is because his is headstrong, obstinate, and one
that will hear no reason. No, say I, but it is because his spirit
is in the hand, under the conduct and preservation, of a Creator.
A Creator can make spirits, uphold spirits, and make one spirit
stronger to stand, than are all the spirits of the world to cast
down. To stand, I say, in a way of patient enduring in well-doing,
against all that hell can do to suppress.

THIRD, A Creator! A Creator can bring down the spirits that oppose,
and make them weak and unstable as water. The Lord, the everlasting
God, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, nor is
weary; there is no searching of his understanding. He gives power
to the faint, and to those that have no might, he increaseth
strength; now mark, even the young shall faint and be weary, and
the young men shall utterly fall. A Creator can dash the spirits
of the enemies with fear. God can put them in fear, and make them
know that they are men and not God, and that their horses are flesh
and not spirit. When the enemy came to take Jesus Christ, their
spirits fainted, their hearts died in them; they went backwards,
and fell to the ground. They had hard work to strengthen their
spirits to a sufficiency of boldness and courage, though they
brought halberts, and staves, and swords, and weapons with them,
to take a naked44 man (John 18:3-7).

And although this is that which is not so visible to the world
as some other things are, yet I believe that God treads down the
spirits of men in a day when they afflict his people, oftener than
we are aware of, or than they are willing to confess. How was the
hostile spirit of Esau trod down of God, when he came out to meet
his poor naked brother, with no less than four hundred armed men?
He fainted before his brother, and instead of killing, kissed him
(Gen 33:4). How was the bloody spirit of Saul trod down, when David
met him at the mouth of the cave, and also at the hill Hachilah
(1 Sam 24; 26)? God is a Creator, and as a Creator, is a spirit
maker, a spirit reviver, a spirit destroyer; he can destroy body
and soul in hell (Luke 12:5).

FOURTH, A Creator! As a Creator, he is over all arts, inventions,
and crafts of men that are set on work to destroy God's people,
whether they be soldiers, excellent orators, or any other whatsoever;
we will single out one--the smith, that roaring fellow, who with
his coals and his bellows makes a continual noise. "I have created
the smith," said God, "that bloweth the coals in the fire, and
that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created
the waster to destroy" (Isa 54:16). The smith, what is he? I
answer, an idol maker, a promoter of false worship, and one that
makes instruments of cruelty, therewith to help to suppress the
true [worship] (Isa 41:7; 44:12; 46:6).

"I have created the smith," saith God, "that bloweth the coals in
the fire." The idol inventor, the idol maker, the supporter of
idol worship, he is my creature, saith God, to teach that he has
power to reach him, and to command his sword to approach him at
his pleasure, notwithstanding his roaring with his bellows, and
his coals in the fire. So then, he cannot do what he will in the
fire, nor with his idol when he has made it; the instrument, also
that he makes for the defence of his idol, and for the suppressing
of God's true worship, shall not do the thing for the which it
is designed by him. And so the very next verse saith: "No weapon
that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that
shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is
the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness
is of me, saith the Lord" (Isa 54:17). And the text saith moreover,
I have created the waster to destroy. The waster, what is that?
Why, the smith makes an idol, and God has made the rust; the
smith makes a sword, and God has made the rust. The rust eats them
up, the moth shall eat them up, the fire shall devour them. "The
wicked," saith the Psalmist, "have drawn out the sword, and have
bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such
as be of upright conversation. Their sword shall enter into their
own heart, and their bows shall be broken" (Psa 37:14,15).

All this can God do, because he is a Creator, and none but God can
do it. Wherefore by this peculiar title of Creator, the apostle
prepareth support for suffering saints, and also shows what
a good conclusion is like to be made with them that suffer for
righteousness' sake, according to his will; and that commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator.

FIFTH, A Creator! A Creator can make such provision for a suffering
people, in all respects, as shall answer all their wants. Have
they lost their peace with the world? Have they no more peace
with this world? Why, a Creator can make, create peace, can create
peace, peace; peace with God, and peace with his conscience; and
that is better than all the peace that can be found elsewhere in
the world (Isa 57:19). Have they lost a good frame of heart? Do
they want a right frame of spirit? Why, though this is to be had
no where in the world, yet a Creator can help them to it (Psa
51:10). Have they lost their spiritual defence? Do they lie too
open to their spiritual foes? Why, this a Creator can help. "And
the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and
upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining
of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a
defence." (Isa 4:5)

This is the work of the Spirit; for though the Spirit itself be
uncreated, yet all the holy works of it in the heart are verily
works of creation. Our new man is a creation; our graces are a
creation; our joys and comforts are a creation45 (2 Cor 5:17,18;
Eph 4:24; Isa 65:17-19). Now a creation none can destroy but a
Creator; wherefore here is comfort. But again, God hath created
us in Christ Jesus; that is another thing. The sun is created in
the heavens; the stars are created in the heavens; the moon is
created in the heavens. Who can reach them, touch them, destroy
them, but the Creator? Why, this is the case of the saint; because
he has to do with a Creator, he is fastened to Christ; yea, is in
him by an act of creation (Eph 2:10), so that unless Christ and
the creation of the Holy Ghost can be destroyed, he is safe that
is suffering according to the will of God, and that hath committed
the keeping of his soul to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator. And this I would have you consider moreover; the man
that suffereth according to the will of God, committeth not such
a soul to this Creator as dwells in carnal men--a naked soul, a
graceless soul, a soul that has nothing in it but sin; but he commits
a converted soul, a regenerate soul, a soul adorned, beautified,
and sanctified, with the jewels, and bracelets, earrings, and
perfumes of the blessed Spirit of grace. And I say again, this
is the work of a Creator, and a Creator can maintain it in its
gallantry,

FOOTNOTE? "Gallantry"; splendour of appearance, grandeur,
nobleness.--Ed.

and he will do so, but he will put forth acts of creating power
for it every day.

SIXTH, A Creator! He that can create can turn and alter any thing,
to what himself would have it. He that made "the seven stars and
Orion, and turneth the shadow of death into the morning" (Amos
5:8), he can "make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry
land springs of water" (Isa 41:18). Our most afflicted and desolate
conditions, he can make as a little haven unto us; he can make us
sing in the wilderness, and can give us our vineyards from thence
(Hosea 2:14,15). He can make Paul sing in the stocks, and good
Rowland Taylor dance as he goeth to the burning stake. Jails, and
mocks, and scourgings, and flouts and imprisonments, and hunger,
and nakedness, and peril, and sword, and dens, and caves, and
rocks, and mountains, God can so sweeten with the honey of his
Word, and make so famous for situation by the glory of his presence,
and so rich and fruitful by the communications of the Holy Ghost,
and so easy by the spreading of his feathers over us, that we
shall not be able to say, that in all the world a more commodious
place, or comfortable condition, can be found. Some have know this,
and have been rather ready to covet to be here, than to shun and
fly from it, as a most unsavoury condition. 46

All these things, I say, God doth as a Creator. He hath created
antipathies, and he can make antipathies close, and have favour
one for another. The lion and the calf, the wolf and the lamb, the
little boy and the cockatrice's den he can reconcile, and make
to be at agreement. So, sufferings and the saint; the prison and
the saint; losses, crosses, and afflictions, and the saint: he can
make to lie down sweetly together.

SEVENTH, A Creator! A Creator can make up all that thou hast
or shalt lose for the sake of thy profession by the hands of the
children of men, be they friends, relations, a world, life, or
what you can conceive of.

1. Hast thou lost thy friend for the sake of thy profession? Is
the whole world set against thee for thy love to God, to Christ,
his cause, and righteousness? Why, a Creator can make up all.
Here, therefore, is the advantage that he hath that suffereth for
righteousness' sake. Jonathan, the very son of bloody Saul, when
David had lost the help of all his own relations, he must fall in
with him, stick to him, and love him as he loved his own soul (1
Sam 18:1-3). Obadiah, Ahab's steward, when the saints were driven
even under ground by the rage of Jezebel the queen, he is appointed
of God to feed them in caves and holes of the earth (1 Kings 18:13).
Yea, the very raven complied with the will of a Creator to bring
the prophet bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh
at night (17:6). When Jeremiah the prophet was rejected of all,
yea, the church that then was, could not help him; he was cast
into the dungeon, and sunk to a great depth there in the mire.
God the Creator, who ruleth the spirits of all men, stirred up
the heart of Ebed-melech the Ethiopian both to petition for his
liberty, and to put him out of the dungeon by the help of thirty
men (Jer 38:7-13). These now, as Christ says, were both fathers,
mothers, brothers, sisters, and as a loving wife or child (Matt
19:29).

2. Hast thou, for the sake of thy faith and profession thereof,
lost thy part in the world? Why, a Creator can make thee houses
as he did for the midwives of Egypt (Exo 1:20,21), and can build
thee a sure house as he did for David his servant, who ventured all
for the love that they had to the fear of God and his way (2 Sam
7). David was thrust out of Saul's house, and driven from his own,
and God opened the heart of Achisch the king of Gath to receive
him, and to give him Ziklag. David, when under the tyranny of
Saul, knew not what to do with his father and his mother, who were
persecuted for his sake, but a Creator inclined the heart of the
king of Moab to receive them to house and harbour (1 Sam 27:5;
22:3,4).

3. Is thy life at stake--is that like to go for thy profession,
for thy harmless profession of the gospel? Why, God the Creator
is Lord of life, and to God the Lord belong the issues from death.
So then, he can, if he will, hold thy breath in thy nostrils, in
spite of all the world; or if he shall suffer them to take away this
for his glory, he can give thee another ten times as good for thy
comfort. "He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth
his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal" (John
12:25).

4. Is thy body to be disfigured, dismembered, starved, hanged, or
burned for the faith and profession of the gospel? Why, a Creator
can either prevent it, or, suffering it, can restore it the very
same to thee again, with great and manifold advantage. He that
made thee to be now what thou art, can make thee to be what thou
never yet wast. It doth not yet appear what we shall be, further
than only by general words (1 John 3:2; Phil 3:21).

EIGHTH, A Creator! Peter sets him before us here as a Creator,
because he would have us live upon him as such; as well as upon
his grace, love, and mercy. In Job's day this was bewailed, that
none or but a few said, "Where is God my maker, who giveth songs
in the night?" (Job 35:10).

Creator, as was hinted before, is one of God's peculiar titles.
It is not given to him above five or six times in all the Book
of God; and usually, when given him, it is either to show his
greatness, or else to convince us that of duty we ought to depend
upon him; and not to faint, if he be on our side, for or under
any adversity, according as we are bidden in the text: "Let them
that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of
their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful creator."
Shall God display his glory before us under the character and
title of a Creator, and shall we yet fear man? Shall he do this
to us when we are under a suffering condition, and that on purpose
that we might commit our souls to him in well-doing, and be quiet,
and shall we take no notice of this? "Who art thou, that thou
shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man
which shall be made as grass; and forgettest the Lord thy maker,
that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations
of the earth?" &c. (Isa 51:12,13).

Had God concealed himself, as to his being a Creator, yet since
he presenteth himself unto us by his Word under so many excellent
titles as are given to no other God besides, methinks it should
make us bold in our God; but when, for our relief, he shall add
to all other that he verily is a Creator, this should make us rest
in hope indeed.

Every nation will have confidence for their own gods, though but
gods that are made with hands--though but the work of the smith
and carpenter; and shall not we trust in the name of the Lord our
God, who is not only a God, but a Creator and former of all things
(Micah 4:5), consequently, the only living and true God, and one
that alone can sustain us? We therefore are to be greatly blamed
if we overlook the ground, such ground of support and comfort as
presenteth itself unto us under the title of a Creator; but then
most of all, if, when we have heard, believed, and known that our
God is such, we shall yet be afraid of a man that shall die, and
forget the Lord our maker. We, I say, have heard, seen, known,
and believed, that our God is the Creator. The heavens declare
his glory, and the firmament showeth his handy-work, and thus he
has showed unto us "his eternal power and Godhead" (Rom 1:20).

Behold, then, thou fearful worm, Jacob, the heavens, the sun, the
moon, the stars; behold the earth, the sea, the air, the fire, and
vapours. Behold, all living things, from leviathan and behemoth
to the least that creepeth in the earth and waters. Yea, behold
thyself, thy soul, thy body, thy fashion, thy building, and consider;
thy God hath made even all these things, and hath given to thee
this being; yea, and all this also he made of that which doth
not appear (Heb 11:1-3). This is that which thou art called to
the consideration of by Peter, in the text; when he letteth fall
from his apostolical meditation that thy God is the Creator, and
commandeth that thou, in thy suffering for him according to his
will, shouldest commit the keeping of thy soul to him as unto a
faithful Creator.

He that has the art thus to do, and that can do it in his straits,
shall never be trodden down. His God, his faith; his faith, his
God, are able to make him stand. For such a man will thus conclude,
that since the Creator of all is with him, what but creatures are
there to be against him? So, then, what is the axe, that it should
boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or the saw, that
it should magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the
rod should shake itself against him that lifteth it up; or as if
the staff should lift up itself as if it were not wood (Isa 10:15).
Read also Isaiah 40:12-31, and then speak, if God as Creator is
not a sure confidence to all the ends of the earth that trust in,
and wait upon him. As Creator, he hath formed and upholdeth all
things; yea, his hands have formed the crooked serpent, wherefore
he also is at his bay (Job 26:13). And thou hast made the dragon
in the sea; and therefore it follows that he can cut and wound him
(Isa 51:9), and give him for meat to the fowls, and to the beasts
inheriting the wilderness (Psa 74:13,14), if he will seek to
swallow up and destroy the church and people of God (Eze 29:3,4).

NINTH, A Creator is God! the God unto whom they that suffer according
to his will are to commit the keeping of their souls--the Creator.
And doth he take charge of them as a Creator? Then this should
teach us to be far off from being dismayed, as the heathens are,
at his tokens; for our God, the Lord, is the true God, the living
God, the King of eternity (Jer 10:1,2,10). We should tremblingly
glory and rejoice when we see him in the world, though upon those
that are the most terrible of his dispensations. God the Creator
will sometimes mount himself and ride through the earth in such
majesty and glory, that he will make all to stand in the tent
doors to behold him. O how he rode in his chariots of salvation
when he went to save his people out of the land of Egypt! How he
shook the nations! Then "his glory covered the heavens, and the
earth was full of his praise. And his brightness was as the light;
he had horns coming out of his hand: and there was the hiding of
his power. Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went
forth at his feet. He stood, and measured the earth: he beheld,
and drove asunder the nations; and the everlasting mountains were
scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways are everlasting."
Then said the prophet, "I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction:
and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble. Was the Lord
displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the rivers?
was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thine
horses and thy chariots of salvation?" (Hab 3:3-8).

So David: "The earth shook and trembled," said he; "the foundations
also of the hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth.
There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his
mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it. He bowed the heavens
also, and came down: and darkness was under his feet. And he rode
upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the
wind. He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about
him were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies. At the brightness
that was before him his thick clouds passed, hail stones and coals
of fire. The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest
gave his voice; hail stones and coals of fire. Yea, he sent out
his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out lightnings, and
discomfited them. Then the channels of waters were seen, and the
foundations of the world were discovered at thy rebuke, O Lord,
at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils" (Psa 18:7-15).

These are glorious things, though shaking dispensations. God is
worthy to be seen in his dispensations as well as in his Word,
though the nations tremble at his presence. "Oh that thou wouldest
rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down," saith the prophet,
"that the mountains might flow down at thy presence!" (Isa 64:1).
We know God, and he is our God, our own God; of whom or of what
should we be afraid? (Psa 46). When God roars out of Zion, and
utters his voice from Jerusalem, when the heavens and the earth do
shake, the Lord shall be the hope of his people, and the strength
of the children of Israel (Joel 3:16).

Every man stayeth up, or letteth his spirit fail, according to
what he knoweth concerning the nature of a thing. He that knows
the sea, knows the waves will toss themselves: he that knows a
lion, will not much wonder to see his paw, or to hear the voice
of his roaring. And shall we that know our God be stricken with
a panic fear, when he cometh out of his holy place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity? We should stand like
those that are next to angels, and tell the blind world who it
is that is thus mounted upon his steed, and that hath the clouds
for the dust of his feet, and that thus rideth upon the wings of
the wind: we should say unto them, "This God is our God for ever
and ever, and he shall be our guide even unto death."

Our God! the Creator! He can turn men to destruction, and say,
Return, ye children of men. When our God shows himself, it is
worth the while to see the sight, though it costs us all that we
have to behold it. Some men will bless and admire every rascally
juggler that can but make again that which they only seem to mar,
or do something that seems to outgo reason; yea, though they make
thunderings and noise in the place where they are, as though the
devil himself were there. Shall saints, then, like slaves, be afraid
of their God, the Creator; of their own God, when he rendeth the
heavens, and comes down? When God comes into the world to do great
things, he must come like himself--like him that is a Creator:
wherefore the heavens and the earth must move at his presence, to
signify that they acknowledge him as such, and pay him that homage
that is due to him as their God and great Creator.

We that are Christians have been trained up by his Son in his
school this many a day, and have been told what a God our Father
is, what an arm he has, and with what a voice he can thunder; how
he can deck himself with majesty and excellency, and array himself
with beauty and glory; how he can cast abroad the rage of his wrath,
and behold every one that is proud, and abase him (Job 40:9-11).
Have we not talked of what he did at the Red Sea, and in the land
of Ham many years ago, and have we forgot him now? Have we not
vaunted and boasted of our God both in church, pulpit, and books;
and spake to the praise of them that, instead of stones, attempted
to drive antichrist out of the world with their lives and their
blood; and are we afraid of our God? He was God, a Creator, then;
and is he not God now? and will he not be as good to us as to them
that have gone before us? or would we limit him to appear in such
ways as only smile upon our flesh; and have him stay, and not show
himself in his heart-shaking dispensations until we are dead and
gone? What if we must go now to heaven, and what if he is thus
come down to fetch us to himself? If we have been wise as serpents,
and innocent as doves--if we can say, Neither against the law of
the Jews, neither against the temple, nor against Caesar, have we
offended anything at all, of what should we be afraid? Let heaven
and earth come together, I dare say they will not hurt us. Our
Lord Jesus, when dilating upon some of the great and necessary works
of our Creator, puts check beforehand to all uncomely fears; to
such fears as become not the faith and profession of a Christian.
"Brother," saith he, "shall deliver up the brother to death, and
the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their
parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated
of all men for my name's sake." What follows? (verse 28), "Fear
them not"; and again, in verse 31, "Fear ye not" (Matt 10:21,22).

So again (Matt 24): "Nation shall rise against nation--there shall
be famines, pestilences, and earthquakes, &c. They shall deliver you
up to be afflicted, and shall kill you.--Many shall be offended,
and shall betray one another.--And many false prophets shall
arise, and deceive many." And yet for all this we are bid not
to be afraid, for all these things, with all other are ordered,
limited, enlarged and straitened, bounded and butted by the will,
and hand, and power of that God unto whom Peter bids us commit
the keeping of our souls, as unto a faithful Creator (verse 7-11;
Mark 13:5-9). To wait for God in the way of his judgments doth
well become a Christian.

To believe he loves us when he shows himself terrible to us, is
also very much becoming of us. Wherefore has he given us grace?
Is it that we should live by sense? Wherefore has he sometimes
visited us? Is it that our hearts might be estranged from him, and
that we still should love the world? And I say again, wherefore
has he so plainly told us of his greatness, and of what he can
do? Is it not that we might be still when the world is disturbed;
and that we might hope for good things to come out of such providences
that, to sense, look as if themselves would eat up and devour all?

Let us wait upon God, walk with God, believe in God, and commit
ourselves, our soul, our body, to God, to be kept. Yea, let us be
content to be at the disposal of God, and rejoice to see him act
according to all his wondrous works. For this is a posture highly
becoming them that say of God he is their Father, and that have
committed the keeping of their souls to him as unto a Creator.
A comely thing it is for the soul that feareth God, to love and
reverence him in all his appearances. We should be like the spaniel
dog, even lie at the foot of our God, as he at the foot of his
master; yea, and should be glad, could we but see his face, though
he treads us down with his feet.

Ay, says one son, so I could, if I thought this high God would
regard me, and take notice of my laying of my soul at his foot,
while I suffer for his Word and truth in the world. Why, do but
see now how the Holy Ghost, for our help, doth hedge up that way
in at which unbelief would come, that there might, as to this,
be no room left for doubting. For as he calleth the God unto whom
we are bid to commit the keeping of our soul, a Creator, so he
saith that he is A CREATOR THAT IS FAITHFUL. "Let them commit the
keeping of their souls unto him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator"--a Creator that will concern himself with the soul committed
to his trust, and that will be faithful to it, according to all
that he has promised.

This, therefore, of God's faithfulness being added to his might and
power, is in itself a ground of great support to those that have
in a way of well-doing committed themselves, their souls, to him
to keep. A Creator; what is it that a Creator cannot do? A faithful
Creator; what is it that one that is faithful will not do, that
is, when he is engaged? And now he is engaged, because thou hast
committed thy soul to him to keep, and because he has bid thee
do so. Let them commit the keeping of their soul to him, as unto
a faithful Creator. I have sometimes seen an unfaithful man engaged,
when a thing has been committed to him to keep. A man that is a
thief, a cheater, a defrauder, will yet be faithful to him that
will commit a charge to him to keep. And the reason is, because,
though he can steal, cheat, defraud, without being taken notice
of; yet he must be seen and known, if he be false in that which
is committed to him to keep. I know the comparison is odious, yet
such have been made by a holier mouth than mine, and as the case
may be, they may be aptest of all to illustrate that which a man
is about to explain. Hark what the unjust judge saith, says the
Lord Jesus Christ (Luke 18).

To commit thy soul to God is to trust him with it; to commit thy
soul to God is to engage him to look to it. And if he should not
be faithful now, he will not be so in any case. For himself has
bidden thee do it; he has also promised to keep it, as has been
already showed in the former part of this discourse. Besides, he is
here said to be faithful--to be a faithful Creator. He challenges
this of faithfulness to himself alone: "Yea, let God be true, but
every man a liar" (Rom 3:4). This, therefore, doth still help to
encourage them that would be faithful to him, to commit the keeping
of our soul to him. A faithful man will encourage one much; how
much more should the faithfulness of God encourage us?

Here, therefore, we have a closing word indeed; a word to wrap
up the text with that is as full of good as the sun is of light.
What can be fitter spoken? What can be added? What now is wanting
to the help of him that has committed his soul to God to keep it
while he is suffering according to his will in the world? He is
engaged, as I said, by that act; thou hast committed thy soul to
him to keep; he is engaged by his own Word; he has bidden thee
commit thy soul to him to keep. He is engaged by his declaring
of himself to be faithful; for that has encouraged thee to commit
thy soul to him to keep. Besides, he has promised to do it; he
has sworn to do it.

"For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by
no greater, he sware by himself, saying, Surely blessing I will
bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee. And so, after he
had patiently endured, (as thou must do,) he obtained the promise.
For men verily swear by the great: and an oath for confirmation is
to them an end of all strife. Wherein God, willing more abundantly
to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel,
confirmed it by an oath: that by two immutable things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation,
who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before
us: which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; whither
the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an High-priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedec" (Heb 6:13-20).

Thus you see what ground we have who suffer according to the will
of God, and that have committed the keeping of our souls to him in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. Here, therefore, I might
make a stop and conclude as to this advice; but now we are in, we
will proceed a little further, and will fall upon three or four
more particulars.

First, then, He will be faithful to us in this: He will keep us from
those allurements of the world that a suffering saint is subject
to. They that suffer have other kinds of temptations upon this
account than other Christians have. The liberty of others, while
they are in bonds, is a temptation to them. The peace of others,
while they are in trouble, is a temptation to them. The enjoyments
of others, while their houses are empty and their goods taken
away, while their own water is sold unto them, and while they are
buying their own wood, is a great temptation to them (Lam 5:4).
And this temptation, were it not that we have to do with a God
that is faithful, would assuredly be a great snare unto them. But
"God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted," as to
this, "above that ye are able" (1 Cor 10:13).

Nay, a suffering man has not only these things lying before him
as a temptation, but perhaps the wife of the bosom lies at him,
saying, O do not cast thyself away; if thou takest this course,
what shall I do? Thou has said thou lovest me; now make it manifest
by granting this my small request. Do not still remain in thine
integrity. Next to this come the children, all which are like to
come to poverty, to beggary, to be undone for want of wherewithal
to feed, and clothe, and provide for them for time to come. Now
also come kindred, and relations, and acquaintance; some chide,
some cry, some argue, some threaten, some promise, some flatter,
and some do all, to befool him for so unadvised an act as to cast
away himself, and to bring his wife and children to beggary for
such a thing as religion. These are sore temptations.47

Next to those come the terrors of men, the gripes of the laws,
the shadow of death, and no man can tell what. All which are
sufficient to pull a man from the gates of life, were he there, if
the faithful Creator stands not to him. "But God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will
with the temptation make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it."--"But God is faithful." It saith not, that thou art: but
"God is faithful"--to his Son, to whom he has given thee; to his
promise, the which he has given thee; to his cause, to which he
has called thee; and to thy soul, the which thou hast committed
to his trust, and the which he also has taken the charge of, as he
is a faithful Creator.

"And will not suffer thee to be tempted." How, not tempted? No;
not above what thou art able. He that tempts thee doth not at all
consider thy strength, so as to stop when he sees thou art weak;
he would have thee overthrown, for therefore it is that he tempteth
thee. But God will not suffer that, because he is faithful, and
because thou hast committed the keeping of thy soul unto him in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. "Not tempted above that
ye are able." He saith not, above that ye are well able. Indeed,
thy strength shall be proportioned to the temptation, but thou
mayest have none over and above to spare; thou shalt not have a
bigger load than God will give thee shoulders to bear. Christ did
bear his burden, but it made him cry out, and sweat as it were
great drops of blood, to carry it. Bear thy burden thou shalt,
and not be destroyed by it; but perhaps thou mayest sometimes roar
under it by reason of the disquietness of thy heart. "But he will
with the temptation make a way of escape." "With the temptation,"
not without it; thou must be tempted, and must escape too. "With
the temptation." As sure as Satan is licensed, so sure he is
limited; and when Satan has ended all the temptation, he shall
depart from thee (Luke 4:13). "He will with the temptation"--by
such a managing of it as shall beak its own neck. God can admit
Satan to tempt, and make the Christian wise to manage the temptation
for his own escape.

"Make a way." It may be thou seest no way of escape. It may be there
is no way--no way in all the world, to escape. Well; but God can
make a way. When Israel was hemmed in at the Red Sea, there was as
then no way--no way in all the world, to escape. O! but God made
a way, and a pathway too, and that through the mighty waters (Exo
15:8,16; Psa 106:9; 78:13). He will make a way with the temptation,
or "will with the temptation make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it." These are the words of the Holy Ghost, who is
God; and they are spoken, yea, committed to record for this very
purpose, that those that are under affliction might commit the
keeping of their soul to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator. That is the first.

Second, He will also be faithful to us as to this: He will give us
a competent measure of wisdom, that in our suffering condition we
may in all things be made able to manage our state with discretion.
We are perhaps weak of natural abilities, parts of utterance, or
the like; and our adversaries are learned, eloquent, and ripe of
parts. Thou hast the disadvantage on thy side, and they have what
the world can afford to encourage them; thou art weak of spirit,
they are bold and strong. The great and the mighty are with thy
enemies, but on thy side there is no comforter (Eccl 4:1).

Why now here is, as to this, and to what else can it be objected,
the faithfulness of God engaged. First, in a general promise; I will
not fail thee, nor forsake thee (Heb 13:5,6). Secondly, we have
an invitation to come to this faithful God for wisdom to assist
and help. For after he had said, "My brethren, count it all joy
when ye fall into divers temptations--and let patience have her
perfect work"; he adds, "If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of
God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it
shall be given him" (James 1:2-5). Here is more than an invitation,
here is a promise--it shall be given him; and all to show us what a
faithful Creator we have committed our souls unto. Doth any lack
wisdom to know how to carry it in a time of trial: let them ask it
of God--of the God that is wisdom itself; let him ask it of God,
the liberal giver, who giveth to all men all that they have, and
upbraideth not for their unworthiness. Nor doth the Holy Ghost
stop here, but enlarges himself in a more particular way to those
that suffer according to the text, saying, "But when they deliver
you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall
be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak" (Matt 10:19).
I have often been amazed in my mind at this text, for how could
Jesus Christ have said such a word if he had not been able to
perform it? This text, therefore, declares him to be God. It is
also a proof of faithfulness to those that suffer for him.

For it is as if he should say, Try me and trust me; if I stand not
by you in a day of distress, never believe me more;--you, suffering
according to the will of God, and committing your souls to him in
well-doing; "I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your
adversaries shall not be able to gainsay or resist," for so he has
it in Luke 21:15. Here is no consideration of what capacity the
people might be of, that were to be persecuted; but what matters
what they are? if fools, it is no matter; if wise, it helpeth
nothing. A mouth and wisdom is to be given; that of itself shall
do. And this is according to that other scripture mentioned afore,
where it saith, "No weapon that is formed against thee shall
prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment
thou shalt condemn" (Isa 54:17). Although it may happen in this,
as in the former temptation, the devil and his agents may give the
saints, in their pleading for the truth, their bellies full both
of cross answers, equivocations, sophistications, wrong glosses
and erroneous interpretations; but truth shall prevail, shall turn
the scale, and bear away the victory.

Third, He will also be faithful to us in this: we shall not want
spiritual support to help us to bear up under our particular parts
of suffering. I do not say that thou shalt be comforted all the
while; but I say he will be to thee so faithful as to comfort thee
under those thodes,48 gusts, blasts, or battering storms that beat
against thy wall (Isa 32:2).

Look then what present degrees or aggravating appearances are in
thy afflictions; to such a degree shalt thou at times be supported.
For as surely as ever the Spirit of God moved Samson at times in
the camp of Dan, when he lay against the Philistines; so will the
Spirit of God move in and upon thee to comfort and to strengthen
thee, whilst thou sufferest for his name in the world. As our
afflictions abound for Christ, so shall our consolations abound by
him (2 Cor 1:5). I have observed that God lays this, that he useth
to comfort his people in a time of sufferings, as an aggravation
of sin upon them that did use to shuck49 and shrink under sufferings.
"I," saith he, "even I, am he that comforteth you; who art thou
that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die" (Isa 51:12)?

"God," says the wise man, "hath set the one over against the other,"
the day of adversity and the day of prosperity, "to the end that
man should find nothing after him" to complain of (Eccl 7:14).
For as certainly as there is a time to mourn, so certainly there
is a time to rejoice: set, I say, for them that suffer for God's
cause according to God's will (Eccl 3:4).

There are several degrees of suffering for righteousness; there
is the scourge of the tongue, the ruin of an estate, the loss of
liberty, a jail, a gibbet, a stake, a dagger. Now, answerable to
these are the comforts of the Holy Ghost prepared, like to like,
part proportioned to part, only the consolations are said to abound
(2 Cor 1).

But the lighter the sufferings are, the more difficult it is to
judge of the comforts of the Spirit of God, for it is common for
a man to be comfortable under sufferings when he suffereth but
little, and knows also that his enemy can touch his flesh, his
estate, or the like, but little: I say, it is common for such a
man to be comfortable in his sufferings, from the consideration
that his enemies can touch him no further. And this may be the
joy of the flesh--the result of reason, and may be very much, if
not altogether, without a mixture of the joy of the Holy Ghost
therewith. The more deep, therefore, and the more dreadful the
sufferings are, the more clearly are seen the comforts of the
Spirit, when a man has comfort where the flesh is dead, stirreth
not, and can do nothing. When a man can be comfortable at the loss
of all--when he is under the sentence of death, or at the place
of execution--when a man's cause, a man's conscience, the promise,
and the Holy Ghost, have all one comfortable voice, and do all,
together with their trumpets, make one sound in the soul; then
the comforts are good, of the right kinds, of God and his Spirit.

I told you before that there are several degrees of sufferings;
wherefore it is not to be expected that he that suffers but little
should partake of the comforts that are prepared for them that
suffer much. He that has only the scourge of the tongue, knows not
what are the comforts that are prepared for him that meets with
the scourge of the whip. And how should a man know what manner
of comforts the Holy Ghost doth use to give at the jail and the
gibbet, when himself, for righteousness, never was there?

But whether this or the other Christian knows it, God has his
consolations for his suffering people; and those, too, such as
are proportioned to the nature or degree of their sufferings; the
which shall assuredly be made appear to them that shall after a
godly manner stick to his truth, and trust him with their souls.
Joseph was cast into prison; but God was with him. John was
banished into the isle called Patmos, for the Word of God; but what
revelations of God had he there! even such as he was a stranger
to all his life before: this, therefore, is to be well heeded. For
it is a demonstration of the faithfulness of God to those that,
suffering according to his will, do commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Fourth, He will also be faithful to us in this: He will not let the
sharpness, nor keenness, nor venom of the arrows of the enemies
of his people, reach so far as to destroy both body and soul at
once; but he will preserve them, when what can be done is done,
to his eternal kingdom and glory, is a marvellous thing; but it
must be so, because God has called them to it. Therefore, after
Peter had told them that the devil their adversary sought to devour
them, and had bidden them resist him, steadfast in the faith,
he saith, "But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his
eternal [kingdom and] glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have
suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
you" (1 Peter 5:10). The truth is, persecution of the godly was,
of God, never intended for their destruction, but for their glory,
and to make them shine the more when they are beyond this valley
of the shadow of death. Indeed, we ofttimes, when we are persecuted,
do feel the terrors of our adversaries in our minds. But it is not
because they can shoot them thither, nor because they of themselves
have power to reach so far, but we, like fools, by our ignorance
and unbelief, do admit them thither.

No suffering, nor inflicter of suffering, can reach the peace of
the sufferer without his own consent. This is provision of God's
making; yea, and if through our folly their terror is admitted
to touch us, yet since we are not our own, but are bought with a
price, we are not so at our own dispose, but that God will have
the butting and bounding of their rage, as also a power to uphold
and support our spirits. When I said my foot slipped, thy mercy,
O Lord, help me up. And the reason why, by God's ordinance, the
spirit is not to be touched in suffering, is, because that is it
that is to sustain the infirmity of the sufferer; therefore God
will have the spirit of his servants kept sound, and in good health
(Prov 18:14; Isa 57:16). The room, therefore, and the ground that
the enemy has to play upon, is the body and outward substance
of the people of God, but the spirit is reserved, for the reason
hinted before, and also that it might be capable of maintaining
of communion with God. And how else could they obey that command
that bids them rejoice in tribulation, and glorify God in the
fires? as it is (Rom 12; Isa 24:15).

But, I say, if they have not power to touch, much less to destroy
body and soul for ever. The body is God's, and he gives that to
them to destroy; the spirit is God's, and he keeps that to himself,
to show that he has both power to do with us what he pleases, and
that he will recover our body also out of their hand; for if the
spirit lives, so must the body, when men have done what they can
therewith. This is the argument of our Lord Jesus Christ himself
(Luke 20:37,38). Therefore the faithfulness of God not only is,
but also will be seen, by them that dare trust him, till the next
world, to his glory and their eternal comfort.

We will now conclude with a short word by way of USE. You see how
I have opened the text, and what hath naturally followed thereupon;
from the whole of which may be gathered:--

Use First, That the people of God are a suffering people--a people
subject to trouble for their faith and profession. The reason is,
besides what hath been said already, because the power of truth
is in their hearts, and shows itself in their lives--a thing which
the devil and the world can by no means abide. He that is born
after the flesh persecuteth him that is born after the Spirit (Gal
4:29). For they cannot agree in religion; the godly are so devout
and the other are so profane, that they cannot do. Not but that
God's people, as they are commanded, are willing to let them
alone; but the other they cannot bear that they should serve God
as they have said (Matt 15:14), and hence ariseth persecution.
The world also would have the religion of the godly to be counted
false--a thing that the others can by no means endure, but will
stand by and maintain, yet in all peaceable manner, their own ways
before them, whatever it costs.

The Christian and the carnal professor are like those two harlots
that you read of in the book of Kings, who strove for the living
child, whose it should be, whose contest could not be decided
until it came to the sword of the king (1 Kings 3). O, but when
the sword was drawn, under a show as if the living child must now
be cut in two, then the true mother was known from the false; for
her bowels yearned upon her son (verse 26,27). The world, what
show soever they have for religion, and however they urge it, that
the truth is with them, have no yearning of bowels for it. Let it
be neither mine nor thine, said she, but divide it; but the woman
whose the living child was, had not a heart to say so. Religion
may lie and die in a ditch for all those that are given to their
sins; nor doth their zeal appear, except when they are gripping
of the godly for his faith towards God. Bowels, yearning of bowels
over God's condemned religion, is only found in the souls of those
who own God has made it.

Use Second, Is it so? Are God's people a suffering people? Then this
should inform them that will be religious, to prepare themselves
for what is like to attend them for their religion. To prepare,
I say, not with carnal weapons, but with the graces of the Spirit
of God; that will help them with meekness and patience to endure.
Sit down then, I say, and count up the cost, before for religion
thou engagest too far; lest thou take upon thee to meddle with
that which thou wilt not know what to do with in the end (Prov
25:8; Luke 14:25-30).

Many there be that are faulty here; they have taken upon them to
profess, not considering what they have taken in hand may cost
them. Wherefore, when troubles come indeed, then they start and
cry. This they like not, because they looked not for it; and if
this be the way to heaven, let who will go on in it for them. Thus
they take offence, and leave Christ's cause and people to shift
for themselves in the world (Matt 13:20,21).

Use Third, But let God's people think never the worse of religion,
because of the coarse entertainment it meeteth with in the world.
It is better to choose God and affliction than the world, and sin,
and carnal peace. It is necessary that we should suffer, because
that we have sinned. And if God will have us suffer a little while
here for his Word, instead of suffering for our sins in hell,
let us be content, and count it a mercy with thankfulness. "The
wicked is reserved to the day of destruction: they shall be brought
forth to the day of wrath" (Job 21:30). How kindly, therefore,
doth God deal with us, when he chooses to afflict us but for a
little, that with everlasting kindness he may have mercy upon us
(Isa 54:7,8). And "it is better, if the will of God be so, that
ye suffer for well-doing than for evil-doing" (1 Peter 3:17).

Use Fourth, Look not, therefore, upon the sufferings of God's people
for their religion, to be tokens of God's great anger. It is, to
be sure, as our heavenly Father orders it, rather a token of his
love; for suffering for the gospel, and for the sincere profession
of it, is indeed a dignity put upon us--a dignity that all men are
not counted worthy of. Count it, therefore, a favour that God has
bestowed upon thee his truth, and graces to enable thee to profess
it, though thou be made to suffer for it (Acts 5:41). Thou mightest
have been a sufferer for thy sins in hell, but thou art not; but
contrariwise art, perhaps, suffering for conscience to God; this
is a dignity. For that thou dost thus by virtue of a heavenly gift,
on the behalf of Christ, for the gospel's sake, and according to
the will of God. This is a dignity that a persecutor shall not be
counted worthy of, until he first convert to Christ (Phil 1:29).

Use Fifth, Take thy affliction with meekness and patience, though
thou endurest grief wrongfully. "For this is thankworthy, if a man
for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully" (1
Peter 2:19). Lay thy hand, then, upon thy mouth, and speak not a
word of ill against him that doth thee wrong; leave thy cause and
thy enemy to God; yea, rather pray that his sin may not be laid to
his charge; wherefore, as I said before, now show thyself a good
man, by loving, pitying, praying for, and by doing good, as thou
art commanded, to them that despitefully use thee (Matt 5:44). I
know thy flesh will be apt to huff, and to be angry, and to wish,
would thou mightest revenge thyself. But this is base, carnal,
sensual, devilish; cast, therefore, such thoughts from thee, as
thoughts that are not fit for a Christian's breast, and betake
thee to those weapons that are not carnal. For the artillery of a
Christian is the Word, faith, and prayer; and in our patience we
must possess our souls (2 Cor 10:5; Luke 21:16-19).

Use Sixth, Be much in the consideration of the all-sufficiency of
thy Father, whose cause thou hast espoused, whose Word thou hast
chosen for thy heritage, and whose paths thou delightest to walk
in. I say, be much in considering how all the world is sustained
by him, and that all life and breath is in his hand, to continue
or diminish as he pleases. Think with thyself also how able he is
to rescue thee from all affliction, or to uphold thee in it with
a quiet mind. Go to him continually, as to a fountain of life that
is open for the supply of the needy. Remember also, if he comes
not at thy call, and comforteth thee not so soon as thou desirest,
it is not of want of love or compassion to thy soul, but to try
thy graces, and to show to the fallen angels that thou wilt serve
God for nought, rather than give out. Also, if it seemeth to thee,
as if God took no care of thee to help thee, but that he hath
rather turned thee over to the ungodly; count this also as a sign
that he delights to see thee hold fast his name, though thou art
laid under the greatest of disadvantages. "If the scourge slay
suddenly, [that is more than it hath done to thee,] he will laugh
at the trial of the innocent" (Job 9:23).

It is a great delight to our God to see his people hold fast
their integrity, and not to deny his name, when under such cloudy
dispensations and discouraging circumstances. And considerations
that thy thus doing is pleasing in his sight through Christ, will
be a support unto thee. God sees thee, though thou canst not now
see him, and he observeth now thy way, though darkness is round
about him; and when he hath tried thee, thou shalt come forth like
gold.

Use Seventh, Take heed of setting of thyself a bound and period
to thy sufferings, unless that period be the grave. Say not to thy
afflicters, Hitherto, and no further, and here shall your proud
waves be stayed. I say, take heed of doing thus, for fear God should
let them go beyond thee. For a man is not prepared to suffer,
further than he thinketh the enemy may be permitted to go. Hence
Christ sets their bounds at the loss of life, and no nearer. So
then, so far as they go beyond thee, so far they will find thee
unprovided, and so not fortified for a reception of their onset
with that Christian gallantry which becomes thee. Observe Paul;
he died daily, he was always delivered unto death, he despaired
of life; and this is the way to be prepared for any calamity. When
a man thinks he has only to prepare for an assault by footmen,
how shall he contend with horses? Or if he looks no further than
to horses, what will he do at the swellings of Jordan (Jer 12:5)?
Wherefore, set thine enemies no bounds: say not, They shall not
pursue me to the death; have the sentence of death in thyself. For
though they may but tick and toy with thee at first, their sword
may reach thy heart-blood at last. The cat at play with the mouse
is sometimes a fit emblem of the way of the wicked with the children
of God. Wherefore, as I said, be always dying; die daily: he that
is not only ready to be bound, but to die, is fit to encounter
any amazement.

Use Eighth, If thine enemies would, or do, put thee under a cloud,
if they wrap thee up in a bear's skin, and then set the dogs
upon thee, marvel not at the matter; this was Joseph's, David's,
Christ's, Stephen's portion, only be thou innocent; say nothing,
do nothing that should render thee faulty; yea, say and do always
that that should render thee a good neighbour, a good Christian,
and a faithful subject. This is the way to help thee to make with
boldness thy appeals to God; this is the way to embolden thy face
against the faces of thine enemies; this is the way to keep thy
conscience quiet and peaceable within thee; and this is the way
to provoke God to appear for thy rescue, or to revenge thy blood
when thou art gone. And do this because it is thy duty--we must
fear God and honour the king--and because this is the way to make
the rock of thy enemies hard: few men have that boldness as to
say, This I do against you, because you profess Christ. When they
persecuted the Lord himself, they said to him, "For a good work
we stone thee not" (John 10:33). Religion that is pure is a hot
thing, and it usually burns the fingers of those that fight against
it; wherefore it is not common for men to oppose religion under its
own naked complexion: wherefore the Jews sought to fasten other
matters upon Christ to kill him for them; though the great spite
they had against him was for his doctrine and miracles. It was for
envy to that that they set themselves against him, and that made
them invent to charge him with rebellion and treason (Matt 27:18;
Luke 23:2).

Use Ninth, Wherefore it becomes all godly men to study to be quiet,
to mind their own business, and as much as in them lies, to be
at peace with all men; to owe no man any thing but love. Pray,
therefore, for all that are in authority; pray for the peace of
the country in which thou dwellest; keep company with holy, and
quiet, and peaceable men. Seek by all good ways the promotion of
godliness, put up injuries, be good to the poor, do good against
evil, be patient towards all men; for "these things are good and
profitable unto men" (Titus 3:8).

Be not inclining to injure men behind their backs, speak evil of
no man, reproach not the governor nor his actions, as he is set
over thee; all his ways are God's, either for thy help or the trial
of thy graces. Wherefore he needs thy prayers, not thy revilings;
thy peaceable deportment, and not a troublesome life. I know that
none of these things can save thee from being devoured by the
mouth of the sons of Belial (1 Kings 21:12,13). Only, what I say
is duty, is profitable, is commendable, is necessary; and that
which will, when the devil has done his worst, render thee lovely
to thy friends, terrible to thine enemies, serviceable in thy
place as a Christian, and will crown the remembrance of thy name,
to them that survive thee, with a blessing; "The memory of the
just is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot" (Prov 10:7).

Use Tenth, I will conclude, then, with a word to those professors,
if there be any such, that are of an unquiet and troublesome
spirit. Friends, I may say to you, as our Lord said once to his
disciples, "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of." To wish
the destruction of your enemies doth not become you. If ye be born
to, and are called, that you may inherit a blessing, pray be free
of your blessing: "Bless, and curse not." If you believe that the
God whom you serve is supreme governor, and is also wise enough
to manage affairs in the world for his church, pray keep fingers
off, and refrain from doing evil. If the counsel of Gamaliel was
good when given to the enemies of God's people, why not fit to be
given to Christians themselves? Therefore refrain from these men,
and let them alone. If the work that these men do is that which
God will promote and set up for ever, then you cannot disannul
it; if not, God has appointed the time of its fall.

A Christian! and of a troublesome spirit; for-shame, forbear; show,
out of a good conversation, thy works, with meekness of wisdom;
and here let me present thee with three or four things.

1. Consider, That though Cain was a very murderer, yet God forbade
any man's meddling with him, under a penalty of revenging his so
doing upon his own head sevenfold. "And the Lord said unto him,
Therefore, whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on
him sevenfold" (Gen 4:15). But why not meddle with Cain, since he
was a murderer? The reason is, because he persecuted his brother
for righteousness' sake, and so espoused a quarrel against God;
for he that persecutes another for righteousness' sake sets himself
against God, fights against God, and seeks to overthrow him. Now,
such an one the Christian must let alone and stand off from, that
God may have his full blow at him in his time.50 Wherefore he saith
to his saints, and to all that are forward to revenge themselves,
Give place, stand back, let me come, leave such an one to be
handled by me. "Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather
give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I
will repay, saith the Lord" (Rom 12:19). Wherefore the Lord set
a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should slay him. You must
not, indeed, you must not avenge yourselves of your enemies. Yea,
though it was lawful once so to do, it is not lawful now. Ye have
heard that it hath been said to them of old time, Thou shalt love
thy neighbour and hate thine enemy; but I say, said our Lord, Love
them, bless them, do good to them, and pray for them that hate
you (Matt 5:43,44).

2. Consider, Revenge is of the flesh,--I mean this our revenge of
ourselves; and it proceeds from anger, wrath, impatience under
the cross, unwillingness to suffer, from too much love to carnal
ease, to estates, to enjoyments, to relations, and the like. It
also flows from a fearful, cowardly spirit; there is nothing of
greatness in it, except it be greatness of untowardness. I know
there may, for all this, be pretences to justice, to righteousness,
to the liberty of the gospel, the suppressing of wickedness, and
the promoting of holiness; but these can be but pretences, or, at
best, but the fruits of a preposterous zeal. For since, as has
been often said in this treatise, the Lord hath forbidden us to do
so, it cannot be imagined that he should yet animate any to such
a thing by the Holy Ghost and the effects of the graces thereof.
Let them, then, if any such be, that are thus minded, be counted
the narrow-spirited, carnal, fleshly, angry, waspish-spirited
professors--the professors that know more of the Jewish than of
the Christian religion, and that love rather to countenance the
motions, passions, and gross motions of and angry mind, that with
meekness to comply with the will of a heavenly Father. Thou art
bid to be like unto him, and also thou art showed wherein (Matt
5:45-48).

There is a man hates God, blasphemes his name, despises his being;
yea, says there is no God. And yet the God that he carrieth it thus
towards doth give him his breakfast, dinner, and supper; clothes
him well, and when night comes, has him to bed, gives him good rest,
blesses his field, his corn, his cattle, his children, and raises
him to high estate. 51 Yea, and this our God doth not only once
or twice, but until these transgressors become old; his patience
is thus extended, years after years, that we might learn of him
to do well.

3. Consider, A professor! and unquiet and troublesome, discontented,
and seeking to be revenged of thy persecutors; where is, or what
kind of grace hast thou got? I dare say, they, even these in which
thou thus actest, are none of the graces of the Spirit. The fruits
of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; against such there is no
law; but wrath, strife, seditions, traitors, and inventors of evil
things are reckoned with the worst of sins, and sinners, and are
plainly called the works of the flesh (Rom 1:29-31; 2 Tim 3:3,4;
Gal 5:19-21).

But I say, where is thy love to thine enemy? where is thy joy under
the cross? where is thy peace when thine anger has put thee upon
being unquiet? Where is thy long-suffering? for, as thou actest,
not ought but thy waspishness can be seen. Where, also, is thy
sweet, meek, and gentle spirit? and is goodness seen in thy seeking
the life or the damage of thy enemy? Away, away; thy graces, if thou
hast any, are by these, thy passions, so jostled up into corners,
and so pent for want of room and liberty to show themselves, that,
by the Word of God, thou canst not be known to be of the right
kind, what a noise soever thou makest.

A Christian, when he sees trouble coming upon him, should not fly
in the face of the instrument that brings it, but in the face of
the cause of its coming. Now the cause is thyself, thy base self,
thy sinful self, and thy unworthy carriages towards God under all
the mercy, patience, and long-suffering that God has bestowed upon
thee, and exercised towards thee. Here thou mayest quarrel and be
revenged, and spare not, so thou take vengeance in a right way,
and then thou wilt do so when thou takest it by godly sorrow (2
Cor 7:10,11).

A Christian, then, should bewail his own doings, his own unworthy
doings, by which he has provoked God to bring a cloud upon him,
and to cover him with it in anger. A Christian should say, This
is my wickedness, when a persecutor touches him; yea, he should
say it, and then shut up his mouth, and bear the indignation of the
Lord, because he has sinned against him. "Thy way and thy doings
have procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness,
because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart" (Jer
4:18).

4. Consider, What conviction of thy goodness can the actions that
flow from such a spirit give unto observers? None at all; yea,
a spirit of unquietness under sufferings, and that seeketh to be
revenged of those that do, for thy faith and the profession thereof,
persecute thee, is so far off of giving conviction to beholders
that thou art right, that it plainly tells them that thou art
wrong. Even Julian the apostate, when he had cast away whatever
he could of Christ, had this remaining with him--that a Christian
ought to take with patience what affliction fell upon him for his
Master's sake; and would hit them in the teeth with an unbecoming
behavior, that complained or that sought redress of them that had
abused them for their faith and godly profession. What will men
say if you shrink and winch, and take your sufferings unquietly,
but that if you yourselves were uppermost, you would persecute
also? Much more have they ground to say so, when you will fight
lying on your backs. Be quiet, then, and if thine enemy strike
thee on one check, turn to him the other; and if he also revile
and curse thee, down upon thy knees and pray for him. This is the
way to convince thy observers that thou art a godly man. Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do, was one of those
things that convinced the centurion that Jesus was a righteous
man; for he stood by the cross to watch and see how Jesus carried
it in these his sufferings, as well as to see execution done (Matt
27:54; Luke 23:34-47).

5. Consider, A professor, unquiet and turbulent under sufferings,
and seeking his own revenge, cannot be a victor over what he
should, nor a keeper of God's commandments.

(1.) How can he be a victor over himself that is led up and down by
the nose by his own passions? There is no man a Christian victor
but he that conquers himself, but he that beats down and keeps
under this body, his lusts, his passions, in the first place.
Is he that is led away with divers lusts a victor? Is he that is
a servant to corruption a victor? And if he that is captivated
by his anger, wrath, passion, discontent, prejudice, &c., be not
led away by them, I am under a mistake. So then, to quarrel with
superiors, or with any that are troublesome to thee for thy faith
and thy profession, bespeaks thee over-mastered and captive, rather
than a master and a conqueror.

(2.) The same may be said upon the second head. He keepeth not the
commandments of God; for those teach him other things, as I have
also showed. The great gospel commands terminate in self-denial;
but if self-revenge is self-denial, I am besides the Book. Christ,
in the book of the Revelation, sets him that keeps the commandments
of God a great way off from him that taketh and smiteth with the
sword: "He that killeth with the sword must be killed with the
sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints" (Rev
13:10). That is, in that they forbear to do thus, and quietly
suffer under those that thus take it and afflict the godly with
it. Again, "Here is the patience of the saints, here are they that
keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus" (14:12). A
patient continuing in well-doing; and if suffering for righteousness
be well-doing, then a patient continuing in that, as in other
things, is the way to keep God's commandments (Rom 2:7).

So that, I say, he keepeth not God's commandments that is angry
with his enemies, and that seeks to be revenged of him that doth
him ill. You know the subject I am upon. "The wrath of man worketh
not the righteousness of God" (James 1:20). Wherefore, professors,
beware, and take heed to your spirits, and see that you let not
out yourselves under your sufferings in such extravagancies of
spirit against your enemies as is no way seemly nor convenient.

6. Consider, Men that are unquiet and discontented, and that seek
revenge upon them that persecute them for their profession, do, by
so doing, also put themselves upon the brink of those ruins that
others are further from. These men are like the fly that cannot
let the candle alone until she hath burned herself in the flame.
Magistrates and men in power have fortified themselves from being
attacked with turbulent and unruly spirits by many and wholesome
laws. And, indeed, should they not do so, one or other, perhaps,
would be quickly tempted to seek to disturb them in the due exercise
of their authority. Now the angry man, he is the fly that must
be tripping and running himself upon the point of these laws; his
angry spirit puts him upon quarrelling with his superiors, and his
quarrelling brings him, by words spoke in heat, within the reach
of the net, and that, with the help of a few more, brings his neck
to the halter. Nor is this, whatever men think, but by the just
judgment of God. "Whosoever, therefore, resisteth the power,
resisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation" (Rom 13:2; Esth 2:21-23). Wherefore, let
the angry man take heed; let the discontented man take heed. He
that has a profession, and has not grace to know, in this matter,
to manage it, is like to bring his profession to shame. Wherefore,
I say, let such take heed; and the graces afore mentioned, and the
due exercise of them, are they and that which can keep us out of
all such dangers.

7. Consider, And what comfort can such a man have who has, by his
discontent and unruly carriages, brought himself, in this manner,
to his end; he has brought himself to shame, his profession to
shame, his friends to shame, and his name to contempt and scorn.
Bad men rejoice at his fall; good men cannot own him, weak men
stumble at him; besides, his cause will not bear him out; his heart
will be clogged with guilt; innocency and boldness will take wings
and fly from him. Though he talketh of religion upon the stage52
or ladder, that will blush to hear its name mentioned by them
that suffer for evil-doing. Wherefore, my brethren, my friends,
my enemies, and all men, what religion, profession, or opinion
soever you hold, fear God, honour the king, and do that duty
to both which is required of you by the Word and law of Christ,
and then, to say no more, you shall not suffer by the power for
evil-doing.


FOOTNOTES:

1 Not equipages to ride, but dainty formalities.--Ed.

2 "A good and harmless conscience"; not as the procuring cause of
confidence in God's tender care of us, but as the strong evidence
of our election and regeneration.--Ed.

3 "Bravery"; magnificence or excellence. "Like a stately ship, with
all her bravery on, and tackle trim, sails filled," &c.--Samson
Agonistes.--Ed.

4 "Bodily pains"; bodily industry or painstaking.--Ed.

5 "Winch"; to wince or kick with impatience. "Shuck"; to shrug up
the shoulders, expressive of dislike or aversion.--Ed.

6 "Much"; in a great degree.

7 "Will they, nill they"; nillan, a Saxon word, meaning "not will"
or contrary to the will--whether with or against their will. "Need
hath no law; will I, or nill I, it must be done."--Damon and
Pathias, 1571.

"If now to man and wife to will and nill The self-same thing, a note
of concord be, I know no couple better can agree."--Ben Johnson.--Ed.

8 How little do persecutors imagine that they are mere tools for
the devil to work with, whether they are harassing Christians by
taking their goods, or are hunting down their liberties or lives.
All works together for good to the Christian, but for unutterable
woe to the persecutor. God give them repentance.--Ed.

9 Wicked men sell themselves to do the devil's work. How degrading
to the dignity of man! Enlisting under a foreign prince to destroy
their own nation, and in so doing to destroy themselves. For an
account of the atrocities and horrors of this war, read the history
of the Waldenses.--Ed.

10 This frequently happened. In Bedford, Nic. Hawkins attended a
meeting, and was fined two pounds; but when the harpies went to
take away his goods, finding that "they had been removed beforehand,
and his house visited with the small pox, the officers declined
entering."--Persecution in Bedford, 1670, p. 6.--Ed.

11 "Dispose"; power, disposal. "All that is mine, I leave at thy
dispose."--Shakespeare.--Ed.

12 In Ireland, whole provinces were desolated, both by Protestants
and Papists, with a ferocity scarcely credible. In England, the
state awfully tormented its pious Christian subjects, to whom
their Lord's words must have been peculiarly consoling: "Fear not
them which kill the body." Did they suffer? How holy were their
enjoyments!--Ed.

13 An awful instance occurred soon after the publication of this
"Advice." John Child, a Baptist minister, one of Bunyan's friends,
to escape persecution, conformed, and became terrified with awful
compunction of conscience. His cries were fearful: "I shall go to
hell"; "I am broken in judgment"; "I am as it were in a flame."
In a fit of desperation he destroyed himself on the 15th October,
1684.--Ed.

14 "What bottom"; what ground or foundation.--Ed.

15 This identical stone is said to be in the chair on which our
monarchs are crowned in Westminster Abbey.--Ed.

16 In so unbounded, eternal and magnificent a mansion, well might
he exclaim, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is
the gate of heaven." Where God meets us with his special presence,
we ought to meet him with the most humble reverence; remembering
his justice and holiness, and our own meanness and vileness.--Ed.

17 The only way of driving sin out of the world is to make known
the Saviour. Reader, can you solve Mr. Bunyan's riddle? When fierce
persecution rages--when the saints are tormented with burning,
hanging, and imprisonment--then, like Stephen, to fix our eyes
upon Jesus, and the gates of heaven open to receive us, submitting
with patience to the will of God. This is the way to drive out
sin.--Ed.

18 How indescribably blessed is the Christian. It is true that he
has to perform his pilgrimage through an enemy's country, beset
with snares, pit-falls, and temptations; but in all his buffetings
and storms of sorrow, his soul is safe; God is a wall of fire
round about it, and the glory in the midst of it. He will guide
us by his counsel, and then receive us to his glory.--Ed.

19 "Looser sort of Christians"; among Christians there are gradations
of character. Some are fixed upon the Saviour, and can say, "For
me to live is Christ." Such decision ensures safety and happiness;
while the looser sort are subject to many sorrows and continual
danger. May we press on towards the mark. "Lord, I believe, help
thou my unbelief."--Ed.

20 This truth ought to be imprinted on every heart. As the absence
of darkness is light, so liberty from the thraldom of sin, and
from the slavery of Satan, essentially induces holiness of life.
Thus holiness and liberty are joined together.--Ed.

21 The whole of this beautiful passage is worthy our careful study
and prayerful obedience. Are we ambitious to govern: be it our
honour to rule our own spirits and tongues. Are we for war? let
it be levied upon our unruly passions. This is laudable ambition.
This is honourable war, producing the peace and happiness of man.
This is real glory to God and man, the very opposite to those
horrors of desolation which gives joy among the devils of hell--the
burning cities, the garments rolled in blood, the shrieks of the
wounded, and the sickening miseries of the widows and orphans of
the slain.--Ed.

22 If this was our conduct, how soon should we get rid of our enemies:
"for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head." Who
would risk such punishment a second time?--Ed.

23 This old proverb is a very striking illustration of the words
of Paul: "Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good."--Ed.

24 The saint must be "made meet for the inheritance." If he neglects
the means given in the Word, his Father, in mercy, "will chasten
him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of
men" (2 Sam 7:14).--Ed.

25 "But if you give sin entrance at the door, It's sting will in,
and may come out not more." Bunyan's Caution.

26 An equally cruel scene took place in the presence of Stow,
the historian, in the reign of Elizabeth. The bailiff of Romford
coming to London, was asked by the curate of Aldgate the news: he
replied, "Many men be up in Essex," [Qu. not in bed?]. For this
he was hung the next morning in front of Mr. Stow's house. How
grateful ought we to be that such sanguinary laws have fled, with
the dark mists of error and cruelty, before the spreading light
of the gospel.--Ed.

27 They shed their blood for Him who afterwards shed his blood for
them. These were the infantry of the noble army of martyrs. If
these infants were thus baptized with blood, though their own,
into the church triumphant, it could be said that what they got
in heaven abundantly compensated for what they lost on earth.--Henry.

28 Nearly all Protestants agree as to the salvation of infants
dying in their infancy--Toplady and the Calvinists on the ground
of their being in the covenant of grace; others because they had
not personally transgressed; supposing that the sufferings and
death of the body is the penalty of original sin. Holy Scripture
appears to settle this question very satisfactorily, by requiring
childlike docility as a preparation for the Spirit's working. The
language of the Saviour is, "Suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of God" (Luke
18:16). "Such" as die in infancy--"such" adults as, with childlike
simplicity, search the Scriptures, and fly for refuge to the
Saviour. "It is NOT the will of your Father which is in heaven
that one of these little ones should perish" (Matt 18:14). "It
were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck,
and be cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these
little ones" (Luke 17:2).--Ed.

29 "To down with"; to receive, to swallow. "Probably it will hardly
down with any body at first hearing."--Locke.--Ed.

30 "New-fashioned carriages"; not equipages to ride in, but dainty
formalities. "Nor in my carriage a feigned niceness shown."--Dryden.
"Trades in the carriage of a holy saint."--Shakespeare.--Ed.

31 Bunyan, when sent to prison, was thus threatened: "If you do
not go to church, or transport yourself, you must stretch by the
neck for it." This led to those painful reflections: "If I should
make a scrabbling shift to clamber up the ladder, yet I should,
either with quaking or other symptoms of faintings, give occasion
to the enemy to reproach the way of God and his people for their
timorousness."--Grace Abounding, No. 334.--Ed.

32 This is a truly Bunyanish mode of expression--clear, comprehensive,
quaint; but so striking as to make an indelible impression.--Ed.

33 A life of faith and holiness is the Christian's badge and
livery. No particular costume, that may conceal a carnal heart--not
a baptismal profession, that may be made by a hypocrite; but it
is "the hidden man of the heart," evidenced by a "meek and quiet
spirit--in all holy conversations and godliness." This is the
Christian's badge and livery, by which he becomes "a living epistle,
known and read of all men."--Ed.

34 These awful cruelties were practised upon Richard Atkins, in
July, 1581. He went to Rome to reprove the people of idolatry.
In St. Peter's Church, he knocked the chalice out of the priest's
hand, and spilt the wine; he then endeavoured to seize the
host, but was prevented. For these mad pranks he suffered savage
torments.--Fox, edit. 1631, vol. 3, p. 1022.--Ed.

35 Every Christian must be decided in his own conscience as to the
formalities of religion; but he who prefers talking of forms and
ceremonies to communion in the substance, is in a melancholy
state.--Ed.

36 What a severe reproach it is to human nature, to see a lovely
child in rags and shoeless, running the streets, exposed to
the pitiless weather, while a splendid equipage passes, in which
a lady holds up her lapdog at the window to give it an airing!!
Is not this a greater crime than sends many a poor wretch to the
treadmill?--Ed.

37 Revenge naturally rises in the mind of man under a sense of
injury. To return good for evil is one of the effects of the new
birth. But while this is done, it is also our duty to petition
kings and parliaments to remove evils.--Ed.

38 "Forth of doors"; out of doors, public.--Ed.

39 "Now it is Christmas"; instead of keeping one day in the year
to commemorate the nativity of Christ in excessive feasting, every
day must be kept holy, in the recollection both of the birth and
death of the Saviour. All eyes are upon the young convert, watching
for his halting; therefore, let every day be holy.--Ed.

40 A striking expression. If a man's righteousness be killed, it
must be by his own will. He must be the butcher to kill himself.--Ed.

41 It is indeed sad to see professors, for the sake of paltry pelf,
or to escape from persecution, denying the Lord Jesus. It subjects
religion to scorn and contempt, and doubles the sorrows and
sufferings of real Christians. Bunyan expresses himself here in
a most admirable manner.--Ed.

42 Bunyan's familiarity with these illustrious men was obtained
by reading Fox's Acts and Monuments, when in prison.--Ed.

43 "Quail"; to overpower. Well might the abettors of Antichrist
wonder at the Christian's support under the most cruel tortures.
While "looking unto Jesus" and the bright visions of eternal glory,
like Stephen, he can pray of his enemies, and tranquilly fall
asleep while undergoing the most frightful sufferings.--Ed.

44 "A naked man"; unarmed, or defenceless. "Had I but serv'd my
God with half the zeal I serv'd my king, he would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mine enemies." Shakespeare's Wolsey.--Ed.

45 How impossible is it for a natural man to understand this new
creation--a new heart, a new birth. How different is regeneration
to water-baptism. How awful the delusion to be mistaken in this,
the foundation of all hope of a blessed immortality. "Create in
me a clean heart, O God!" How consoling the fact: "Now a creation
none can destroy but a Creator!" and "changes not, therefore we
are not consumed."--Ed.


46 "O happie he who doth possesse
Christ for his fellow-prisoner, who doth gladde
With heavenly sunbeames jails that are most sad."
Written on the prison walls of the Tower of London by William
Prynne.--Ed.


47 "Sore temptations" poor Bunyan found them. When dragged from his
home to prison, he speaks of his poor blind daughter in language
of impassioned solicitude: "Poor child, thought I, what sorrow
art thou like to have for thy portion in this world! Thou must be
beaten, must beg, suffer hunger, cold, nakedness, and a thousand
calamities, though I cannot now endure the wind shall blow upon
thee! Oh! the hardships I thought my blind one might go under
would break my heart to pieces."--"The parting with my wife and
poor children hath oft been to me in this place as the pulling my
flesh from my bones."--Grace Abounding, 327, 328.--Ed.

48 "Thodes"; whirlwinds. This word does not occur in any English
dictionary or glossary. It gave me much trouble, and a walk of
seven miles, to discover its meaning. It is the Saxon for noise,
whirlwind, turbulence. This provincial word was probably derived
from some Saxon tribe that settled in Bedfordshire.--Ed.

49 "To shuck"; to shake violently--from which is the noun, "a
pea-shuck," the shell from which peas have been shaken.--Ed.

50 How correct, but how dismal a picture is here drawn of the
persecutor! God has wise and holy ends in protecting and prolonging
the lives even of very wicked men. "Slay them not, lest my people
forget; scatter them by thy power." Compare Ecclessiastes 8:10.
Pity the persecutor--pray for him; but if he repent not, stand
off; "God will have his full blow at him in his time," and crush
him down into misery and despair.--Ed.

51 Like a multitude of passages in Bunyan's writings, this passage
is exceedingly striking. It illustrates our Lord's words in Matthew
5:44,45: "Love your enemies--that ye may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven."--Ed.

52 "Stage"; upon which many a Nonconformist stood with his head in
the pillory. "Ladder" to the gallows, upon which victims suffered
death by hanging.--Ed.

***

AN EXHORTATION TO PEACE AND UNITY



[ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR]

This treatise was first published in 1688, after Bunyan's death,
at the end of the second edition of the Barren Fig Tree, with a
black border round the title. It was continued in the third edition
1692, but was subsequently omitted, although the Barren Fig Tree
was printed for the same publisher. It has been printed in every
edition of Bunyan's Works. Respect for the judgment of others leads
me to allow it a place in the first complete edition, although
I have serious doubts whether it was written by him, for these
reasons:--

1. It appears to have been totally unknown to his personal friends,
Charles Doe and others, who very carefully gathered up, not only
all his published works, but his manuscripts also. An interesting
list of these was given in the 'Struggler,' 1691. Nor is it found
in any publisher's list of Bunyan's Works.

2. The style is not that of Bunyan, nor is it even Bunyanish. It
has none of those striking remarks that render all his treatises
so deeply interesting.

3. The author introduces scraps of Latin references to 'Machiavel,'
to the 'learned Stillingfleet,' and to ancient heathen writers.
The frequent recurrence of the words, 'as a certain learned man
observes,' is very foreign to Bunyan's manner of confirming his
sentiments. 'Thus saith the Lord,' is the seal of his testimony.

4. Misapplication of Scripture (Acts 9:31) as if the 'rest' was from
internal dissensions, when in fact it was from external persecution.

5. The terms 'infallible,' 'excommunication,' and 'reason,' are
used in a way not at all Bunyanish.

6. How would his spirit have been grieved at a sentence which occurs:
'Would a heathen god refuse to answer such prayers in which the
supplicants were not agreed; and shall we think the true God will
answer them?' Do stocks or stones answer prayers?

7. Bunyan's peculiar practice of admitting all the Lord's children
to the Lord's table; all such as he hoped were spiritually baptized,
without reference to water-baptism, is here directly opposed. The
author refers to 1 Corinthians 12:13 on which text he says--'I need
not go about to confute that notion that some of late have had of
this text, viz., that the baptism here spoken of is the baptism of
the Spirit, because you have not owned and declared that notion
as your judgment, but on the contrary.' The fact is, that Bunyan
is one of those here noticed as 'some of late,' and his church did
hold that judgment. His comment on this text is, 'not of water,
for by one SPIRIT are we all baptized into one body.'--Reason of
my Practice. And in his 'Differences about Water-Baptism no Bar
to Communion,' he thus argues upon that text, 'Here is a baptism
mentioned by which they are initiated into one body; now that this
is the baptism of water is utterly against the words of the text;
for by one SPIRIT we are all baptized into one body.'--'It is the
unity of the Spirit, not water, that is intended.' Bunyan was the
great champion for the practice of receiving all to church-communion
whom God had received in Christ, without respect to water-baptism;
and had he changed his sentiments upon a subject which occasioned
him so much hostility, even from his Baptist brethren, it would
have been heralded forth as a triumph.

In 1684, four years prior to his death, he republished these sentiments
in the first edition of 'A Holy Life the Beauty of Christianity';
his words are--'Men are wedded to their opinions more than the
law of grace and love will permit. Here is a Presbyter, here an
Independent, a Baptist, so joined each man to his own opinions,
that they cannot have that communion one with another, as by the
testament of the Lord Jesus they are commanded and enjoined.'
Bunyan, there can be no doubt, lived and died in the conviction,
that differences were permitted among Christians to stimulate them
to search the Scriptures, and to exercise the grace of forbearance,
as was the case in the primitive churches, in their disputes about
meats and days, and even as to whether the Gentiles were to be
visited with the gospel.

8. Bunyan is ever pressing the duty of private judgment in all the
affairs of religion; not to be scared with the taunts of 'schism,'
'division-makers,' 'new separatists,' 'wiser than your teachers,'
and similar arrows, drawn from Satan's quiver, which occur in this
exhortation.

Judging from the style--the reference to the laying on of hands--the
Latin quotations, and those from learned men, it appears somewhat
like the pen of D'Anvers, who answered Bunyan upon the question--Whether
water-baptism is a scriptural term of communion? It is, however,
now faithfully reprinted, that our readers may form their own
judgment.

Hackney, New-Year's Day, 1850 GEORGE OFFOR.




An Exhortationto Peace and Unity


'Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.'--Ephesians 4:3

Beloved, religion is the great bond of human society, and it were
well if itself were kept within the bond of unity; and that it may
so be, let us, according to the text, use our utmost endeavours
'to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.'

These words contain a counsel and a caution: the counsel is, 'That
we endeavour the unity of the Spirit'; the caution is, 'That we do
it in the bond of peace': as if he should say, I would have you
live in unity; but yet I would have you to be careful that you do
not purchase unity with the breach of charity. Let us, therefore,
be cautioned that we do not so press after unity in practice and
opinion, as to break the bond of peace and affection.

In the handling of these words, I shall observe this method:--First,
I shall open the sense of the text. Second, I shall show wherein this
unity and peace consists. Third, I shall show you the fruits and
benefits of it, together with nine inconveniencies and mischiefs
that attend those churches where unity and peace is wanting.
Fourth, and lastly, I shall give you twelve directions and motives
for the obtaining of it.

First, As touching the sense of the text; when we are counselled to
keep the unity of the Spirit, we are not to understand the Spirit
of God as personally so considered; because the Spirit of God, in
that sense, is not capable of being divided; and so there would
be no need for us to endeavour to keep the unity of it.

By the unity of the Spirit, then, we are to understand that unity of
mind which the Spirit of God calls for, and requires Christians to
endeavour after; hence it is that we are exhorted by 'one spirit,
with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel' (Phil
1:27).

But farther, the apostle in these words alludes to the state and
composition of a natural body; and doth thereby inform us that the
mystical body of Christ holds an analogy with the natural body of
a man. As,

1. In the natural body there must be a spirit to animate it; for
'the body without the spirit is dead' (James 2:26). So it is in
the mystical body of Christ; the apostle no sooner tells us of
that one body, but he minds us of that 'one spirit' (Eph 4:4).

2. The body hath 'joints and bands' to unite all the parts; so hath
the mystical body of Christ (Col 2:19). This is that bond of peace
mentioned in the text, as also in Ephesians 4:16, where 'the whole
body' is said to be 'fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth.'

3. The natural body receives counsel and nourishment from the head;
so doth the mystical body of Christ. He is their counsellor, and
him they must hear; he is their head, and him they must hold:
hence it is that the apostle complaineth (Col 2:19), of some that
did 'not hold the head, from which all the body by joints and
bands hath nourishment.'

4. The natural body cannot well subsist, if either the spirit be
wounded or the joints broken or dislocated; the body cannot bear a
wounded or broken spirit; 'A broken spirit drieth the bones' (Prov
17:22), and 'a wounded spirit who can bear?' (Prov 18:14). And on
the other hand, how often has the disjointing of the body, and the
breakings thereof, occasioned the expiration of the spirit? In like
manner it fares with the mystical body of Christ: how do divided
spirits break the bonds of peace, which are the joints of this
body! And how doth the breakings of the body and church of Christ
wound the spirit of Christians, and oftentimes occasion the spirit
and life of Christianity to languish, if not to expire! How needful
is it, then, that we endeavour 'the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace?'

Second, I now come to show you wherein this unity and peace consists,
and this I shall demonstrate in five particulars.

1. This unity and peace may consist in the ignorance of many truths,
and in the holding of some errors; or else this duty of peace and
unity could not be practicable by any on this side perfection. But
we must now endeavour the unity of the Spirit, 'till we all come
in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God'
(Eph 4:13). Because now, as the apostle saith, 'we know in part,
and we prophesy in part,' and 'now we see through a glass, darkly'
(1 Cor 13:12). And as this is true in general, so we may find it
true if we descend to particular instances: the disciples seemed
to be ignorant of that great truth which they had often, and in
much plainness, been taught by their Master once and again, viz.,
that his kingdom was not of this world, and that in the world they
should suffer and be persecuted, yet in Acts 1:6 we read, that they
asked of him if he would 'at this time restore again the kingdom
to Israel?' thereby discovering that Christ's kingdom, as they
thought, should consist in his temporal jurisdiction over Israel,
which they expected should now commence and take place amongst
them. Again, our Lord tells them that he had many things to say,
and these were many important truths which they could not now bear
(John 16:12). And that these were important truths appears by the
10th and 11th verses, where he is discoursing of righteousness
and judgment; and then adds, that he had yet many things to say
which they could not bear; and thereupon promises the Comforter
to lead them into ALL TRUTH; which implies that they were yet
ignorant of many truths, and consequently held divers errors; and
yet for all this he prays for, and presses them to their great
duty of peace and unity (John 14:27; 17:21). To this may be added
that of Hebrews 5:11, where the author saith, He had many things
to say of the priestly office of Christ, which, by reason of their
dulness, they were not capable to receive; as also that in Acts
10, where Peter seems to be ignorant of that truth, viz., that the
gospel was to be preached to all nations; and contrary hereunto,
he erred in thinking it unlawful to preach amongst the Gentiles.
I shall add two texts more; one is Acts 19:2, where we read, That
those disciples which had been discipled and baptized by John,
were yet ignorant of the Holy Ghost, and knew not, as the text
tells us, 'whether there be any Holy Ghost,' or no; though John
did teach constantly, that he that should come after him, should
baptize with the Holy Ghost and fire. From hence we may easily and
plainly infer, that Christians may be ignorant of many truths, by
reason of weak and dull capacities, and other such like impediments,
even while those truths are with much plainness delivered to
them. Again, we read (Heb 5:13) of some that were 'unskillful in
the word of righteousness,' who nevertheless are called babes in
Christ, and with whom unity and peace is to be inviolably kept
and maintained.

2. As this unity and peace may consist in the ignorance of many
truths, and in the holding some errors, so it must consist with,
and it cannot consist without, the believing and practising those
things which are necessary to salvation and church communion; and
they are, (1.) Believing that Christ the Son of God died for the
sins of men. (2.) That whoever believeth ought to be baptized.
(3.) The third thing essential to this communion is a holy and a
blameless conversation.

(1.) That believing that the Son of God died for the sins of men
is necessary to salvation, I prove by these texts, which tell us
that he that doth not believe shall be damned (Mark 16:16; John
3:18; 2 Thess 2:12; Rom 10:10).

That it is also necessary to church-communion, appears from Matthew
16:16-18. Peter having confessed that Christ was the Son of the
living God, Christ thereupon assures Peter, that upon this rock,
viz., this profession of faith, or this Christ which Peter had
confessed, he would build his church, and the gates of hell should
not prevail against it. And (1 Cor 3:11), the apostle having told
the Corinthians they were God's building, presently adds, that
they could not be built upon any foundation but upon that which
was laid, which was Jesus Christ. All which proves, that Christian
society is founded upon the profession of Christ; and not only
Scripture, but the laws of right reason, dictate this, that some
rules and orders must be observed for the founding all society,
which must be consented to by all that will be of it. Hence it comes
to pass, that to own Christ as the Lord and head of Christians,
is essential to the founding Christian society.

(2.) The Scriptures have declared that this faith gives the
professors of it a right to baptism, as in the case of the eunuch
(Acts 8), when he demanded why he might not be baptized? Philip
answereth, that if he believed with all his heart, he might; the
eunuch thereupon confessing Christ, was baptized.

Now, that baptism is essential to church-communion, I prove
from 1 Corinthians 12, where we shall find the apostle labouring
to prevent an evil use that might be made of spiritual gifts, as
thereby to be puffed up; and to think that such as wanted them,
were not of the body, or to be esteemed members; he thereupon
resolves, that whoever did confess Christ, and own him for his
head, did it by the Spirit (v 3), though they might not have such
a visible manifestation of it as others had; and therefore they
ought to be owned as members, as appears (v 23). And not only because
they have called him Lord by the Spirit, but because they have,
by the guidance and direction of the same Spirit, been baptized
(v 13): 'For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body,'
&c. I need not go about to confute that notion that some of late
have had of this text, viz., that the baptism here spoken of is
the baptism of the Spirit, because you have not owned and declared
that notion as your judgment; but on the contrary, all of you that
I have ever conversed with, have declared it to be understood of
baptism with water, by the direction of the Spirit. If so, then
it follows, that men and women are declared members of Christ's
body by baptism, and cannot be by Scripture reputed and esteemed
so without it; which farther appears from Romans 6:5, where men,
by baptism, are said to be planted into 'the likeness of his death.'
And (Col 2:12), we are said to be 'buried with him by baptism.'
All which, together with the consent of all Christians, (some few
in these late times excepted,) do prove that baptism is necessary
to the initiating persons into the church of Christ.

(3.) Holiness of life is essential to church-communion, because it
seems to be the reason why Christ founded a church in the world,
viz., that men might thereby be watched over and kept from falling;
and that if any be overtaken with a fault, he that is spiritual
might restore him.

That by this means men and women might be preserved, without
blame, to the coming of Christ; and 'the grace of God teacheth us
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and
uprightly in this present evil world' (Titus 2:11,12). 'And let
every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity' (2
Tim 2:19). And James tells us, speaking of the Christian religion,
that 'pure religion, and undefiled, before God--is to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world' (James 1:27). From all which, together
with many more texts that might be produced, it appears that an
unholy and profane life is inconsistent with Christian religion
and society, and that holiness is essential to salvation and
church-communion; so that these three things--faith, baptism, and
a holy life, as I said before, all churches must agree and unite
in, as those things which, when wanting, will destroy their
being. And let not any think, that when I say believing the Son
of God died for the sins of men is essential to salvation and
church-communion, that I hereby would exclude all other articles
of the Christian creed as not necessary, as the belief of the
resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment, &c.; which, for want
of time, I omit to speak particularly to, and the rather because
I understand this great article, of believing the Son of God died
for the sins of men, is comprehensive of all others, and is that
from whence all other articles may easily be inferred.

And here I would not be mistaken, as though I held there were
nothing else for Christians to practise, when I say this is all
that is requisite to church-communion; for I very well know that
Christ requires many other things of us after we are members of
his body, which, if we knowingly or maliciously refuse, may be the
cause, not only of excommunication, but damnation. But yet these
are such things as relate to the wellbeing, and not to the being,
of churches; as laying on of hands, in the primitive times, upon
believers, by which they did receive the gifts of the Spirit--this,
I say, was for the increase and edifying of the body, and not
that thereby they might become of the body of Christ, for that
they were before. And do not think that I believe laying on of
hands was no apostolical institution, because I say men are not
thereby made members of Christ's body, or because I say that it
is not essential to church-communion. Why should I be thought to
be against a fire in the chimney, because I say it must not be in
the thatch of the house? Consider, then, how pernicious a thing
it is to make every doctrine, though true, the bound of communion;
this is that which destroys unity; and, by this rule, all men must
be perfect before they can be in peace. For do we not see daily,
that as soon as men come to a clearer understanding of the mind
of God, to say the best of what they hold, that presently all men
are excommunicable, if not damnable, that do not agree with them.
Do not some believe and see that to be pride and covetousness,
which others do not, because, it may be, they have more narrowly
and diligently searched into their duty of these things than others
have? What then? must all men that have not so large acquaintance
of their duty herein be excommunicated? Indeed, it were to be
wished that more moderation in apparel and secular concernments
were found among churches; but God forbid, that if they should
come short herein, that we should say, as one lately said, that
he could not communicate with such a people, because they were
proud and superfluous in their apparel.

Let me appeal to such, and demand of them, if there was not a
time, since they believed and were baptized, wherein they did not
believe laying on of hands a duty; and did they not then believe,
and do they not still believe, they were members of the body of
Christ? And was not there a time when you did not so well understand
the nature and extent of pride and covetousness as now you do?
And did you not then believe, and do you not still believe, that
you were true members of Christ, though less perfect? Why, then,
should you not judge of those that differ from you herein, as you
judged of yourselves when you were as they now are? How needful,
then, is it for Christians to distinguish, if ever they would be
at peace and unity, between those truths which are essential to
church-communion, and those that are not!

3. Unity and peace consists in our making one shoulder to practise
and put in execution the things we do know. 'Nevertheless, whereto
we have--attained, let us walk by the same rule, and mind the same
thing' (Phil 3:16). How sad is it to see our zeal consume us, and
our precious time, in things doubtful and disputable, while we are
not concerned nor affected with the practice of those indisputable
things we all agree in! We all know charity to be the great
command, and yet how few agree to practise it! We all know they
that labour in the Word and doctrine are worthy of double honour;
and that God hath ordained, that they which preach the gospel should
live of the gospel; these duties, however others have cavilled
at them, I know you agree in them, and are persuaded of your duty
herein; but where is your zeal to practise? O how well would it
be with churches if they were but half as zealous for the great,
and plain, and indisputable things, and the more chargeable and
costly things of religion, as they are for things doubtful or less
necessary, or for things that are no charge to them, and cost them
nothing but the breath of contention, though that may be too great
a price for the small things they purchase with it.

But further: Do we not all agree, that men that preach the gospel
should do it like workmen that need not be ashamed? and yet how
little is this considered by many preachers, who never consider,
before they speak, of what they say, or whereof they affirm! How
few give themselves to study that they may be approved! How few
meditate, and give themselves to these things, that their profiting
may appear to all!

For the Lord's sake, let us unite to practise those things we know;
and if we would have more talents, let us all agree to improve
those we have.

See the spirit that was among the primitive professors, that knowing
and believing how much it concerned them, in the propagating of
Christianity, to show forth love to one another, that so all might
know them to be Christ's disciples, rather than there should be
any complainings among them, they sold all they had. Oh how zealous
were these to practise, and, with one shoulder, to do that that
was upon their hearts for God! I might further add, how often have
we agreed in our judgment? and hath it not been upon our hearts,
that this and the other thing is good to be done to enlighten the
dark world, and to repair the breaches of churches, and to raise
up those churches that now lie agasping, and among whom the soul
of religion is expiring? But what do we more than talk of them?
Do not most decline these things when they either call for their
purses or their persons to help in this and such like works as
these? Let us then, in what we know, unite, that we may put it in
practice, remembering that, if we know these things, we shall be
happy if we do them.

4. This unity and peace consists in our joining and agreeing to pray
for, and to press after, those truths we do not know. The disciples
in the primitive times were conscious of their imperfections,
and, therefore, they, with one accord, continued in prayer and
supplications. If we were more in the sense of our own ignorances
and imperfections, we should carry it better towards those that
differ from us; then we should abound more in the spirit of meekness
and forbearance, that thereby we might bring others, or be brought
by others, to the knowledge of the truth; this would make us go
to God, and say with Elihu, That which we know not, teach thou us
(Job 34:32). Brethren, did we but all agree that we were erring
in many things, we should soon agree to go to God, and pray for
more wisdom and revelation of his mind and will concerning us.

But here is our misery, that we no sooner receive any thing for
truth, but we presently ascend the chair of infallibility with it,
as though in this we could not err; hence it is we are impatient
of contradiction, and become uncharitable to those that are not
of the same mind; but now a consciousness that we may mistake,
or that if my brother err in one thing I may err in another--this
will unite us in affection, and engage us to press after perfection,
according to that of the apostle, 'Brethren, I count not myself
to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things
which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus,' 'and if in any thing ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you' (Phil
3:13-15). O then, that we could but unite and agree to go to God
for one another, in confidence that he will teach us; and that if
any one of us want wisdom, as who of us does not, we might agree
to ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth no
man. Let us, like those people spoken of in Isaiah 2, say one to
another, Come, let us go to the Lord, for 'he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths.'

5. This unity and peace mainly consists in unity of love and affection;
this is the great and indispensable duty of all Christians; by
this they are declared Christ's disciples; and hence it is that
love is called the great commandment, the old commandment, and
the new commandment--that which was commanded in the beginning,
and will remain to the end; yea, and after the end. 'Charity never
faileth: but--whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether
there be knowledge, it shall vanish away' (1 Cor 13:8). 'And now
abideth faith, hope, charity--but the greatest of these is charity'
(v 13). 'Above all these things put on charity, which is the bond
of perfectness' (Col 3:14). Because charity is 'the end of the
commandment' (1 Tim 1:5). Charity is therefore called the royal
law; and though it had a superintendency over other laws, and,
doubtless, is a law to which other laws must give place when they
come in competition with it. 'Above all things, [therefore,] have
fervent charity among yourselves, for charity shall cover the
multitude of sins' (1 Peter 4:8). Let us, therefore, live in unity
and peace, and the God of love and peace will be with us.

That you may so do, let me remember you, in the words of a learned
man, that the unity of the church is a unity of love and affection,
and not a bare uniformity of practice and opinion.

Third, Having shown you wherein this unity consists, I now come to
the third general thing propounded, and that is, to show you the
fruits and benefits of unity and peace; together with the mischiefs
and inconveniences that attend those churches where unity and peace
are wanting.

1. Unity and peace is a duty well-pleasing to God, who is styled
the author of peace, and not of confusion, in all the churches.
God's Spirit rejoiceth in the unity of our spirits; but, on the
other hand, where strife and divisions are, there the Spirit of
God is grieved. Hence is it that the apostle no sooner calls upon
the Ephesians not to grieve the Spirit of God, but he presently
subjoins us a remedy against that evil: that they put away bitterness
and evil speaking, 'and be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven
you' (Eph 4:32).

2. As unity and peace is pleasing to God, and rejoiceth his Spirit,
so it rejoiceth the hearts and spirits of God's people--unity and
peace brings heaven down upon earth among us. Hence it is that
the apostle tells us (Rom 14:17) that 'the kingdom of God is not
meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost.' Where unity and peace is, there is heaven upon earth; by
this we taste the first fruits of that blessed estate we shall one
day live in the fruition of, when we shall come 'to the general
assembly and church of the first-born,' whose names are written
in heaven, 'and to God, the judge of all, and to the spirits of
just men made perfect' (Heb 12:23).

This outward peace of the church, as a learned man observes,
distils into peace of conscience, and turns writings and readings
of controversy into treatises of mortification and devotion.

And the psalmist tells us, that it is not only good, but pleasant
'for brethren to dwell together in unity' (Psa 133), but where
unity and peace is wanting, there are storms and troubles; 'where
envy and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work' (James
3:16). It is the outward peace of the church that increaseth our
inward joy, and the peace of God's house gives us occasion to eat
our meat with gladness in our houses (Acts 2:46).

3. The unity and peace of the church makes communion of saints
desirable. What is it that embitters church-communion, and makes it
burdensome, but divisions? Have you not heard many complain that
they are weary of church-communion, because of church contention?
but now, where unity and peace is, there Christians long for
communion.

David saith that he was glad when they said unto him, 'Let us go
into the house of the Lord' (Psa 122:1). Why was this, but because,
as the third verse tells us, Jerusalem was a city compact together,
where the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord, to give thanks
to his name. And David, speaking of the man that was once his
friend, doth thereby let us know the benefit of peace and unity
(Psa 55:14): 'We,' saith he, 'took sweet counsel together, and
walked unto the house of God in company.' Where unity is strongest,
communion is sweetest and most desirable. You see, then, that peace
and union fill the people of God with desires after communion; but,
on the other hand, hear how David complains (Psa 120:5), 'Woe is
me that I sojourn in Meshech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar!'
The psalmist here is thought to allude to a sort of men that dwelt
in the deserts of Arabia, that got their livings by contention;
and, therefore, he adds (v 6), that his soul had long dwelt with
them that hated peace: this was that which made him long for
the courts of God, and esteem one day in his house better than
a thousand. This made his soul even faint for the house of God,
because of the peace of it; 'Blessed are they,' saith he, 'that
dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee' (Psa 84:4).
There is a certain note of concord, as appears (Acts 2) where we
read of primitive Christians, meeting with one accord, praising
God.

4. Where unity and peace is, there many mischiefs and inconveniences
are prevented which attend those people where peace and unity
are wanting; and of those many that might be mentioned, I shall
briefly insist upon these nine:--

(1.) Where unity and peace are wanting, there is much precious
time spent to no purpose. How many days are spent, and how many
fruitless journeys made to no profit, where the people are not in
peace! How often have many redeemed time, even in seed-time and
harvest, when they could scarce afford it to go to church, and by
reason of their divisions, come home worse than they went, repenting
they have spent so much precious time to so little benefit! How sad
is it to see men spend their precious time, in which they should
work out their salvation, by labouring, as in the fire, to prove
an uncertain and doubtful proposition, and to trifle away their
time, in which they should make their calling and election sure,
to make sure of an opinion which, when they have done all, they are
not infallibly sure whether it be true or no; because all things
necessary to salvation and church-communion are plainly laid down
in Scripture, in which we may be infallibly sure of the truth of
them; but for other things that we have no plain texts for, but
the truth of them depends upon our interpretations, here we must
be cautioned that we do not spend much time in imposing those
upon others, or venting those among others, unless we can assume
infallibility--otherwise, we spend time upon uncertainty; and whoever
casts their eyes abroad, and doth open their ears to intelligence,
shall both see, and, to their sorrow, hear that many churches spend
most of their time in jangling and contending about those things
which are neither essential to salvation or church-communion,
and that which is worse, about such doubtful questions which they
are never able to give an infallible solution of; but now, where
unity and peace is, there our time is spent in praising God, and
in those great questions--what we should do to be saved? and how
we may be more holy and more humble towards God, and more charitable
and more serviceable to one another?

(2.) Where unity and peace is wanting, there is evil surmising and
evil speaking, to the damage and disgrace, if not to the ruining
of one another (Gal 5:14,15): 'The whole law is fulfilled in one
word, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself; but if ye bite
and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of
another.' No sooner the bond of charity is broken, which is as a
wall about Christians, but soon they begin to make havoc and spoil
of one another; then there is raising evil reports, and taking
up evil reports against each other. Hence it is that whispering
and backbiting proceeds, and going from house to house to blazon
the faults and infirmities of others: hence it is that we watch
for the haltings of one another, and do inwardly rejoice at the
miscarriages of others, saying in our hearts, Ah, ah, so we would
have it; but now, where unity and peace is, there is charity; and
where charity is, there we are willing to hide the faults, and
cover the nakedness of our brethren. 'Charity thinketh no evil'
(1 Cor 13:5), and, therefore, it cannot surmise, neither will it
speak evil.

(3.) Where unity and peace is wanting, there can be no great matters
enterprised; we cannot do much for God nor much for one another.
When the devil would hinder the bringing to pass of good in
nations and churches, he divides their councils; and, as one well
observes, he divides their heads, that he may divide their hands;
when Jacob had prophesied of the cruelty of Simeon and Levi, who
were brethren, he threatens them with the consequent of it (Gen
49:7): 'I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.' The
devil is not to learn that maxim he hath taught the Machiavellians
of the world, divide et impera--divide and rule; it is a united
force that is formidable: hence the spouse, in the Canticles,
is said to be 'but one,' 'and the only one of her mother' (Cant
6:9). Hereupon it is said of her (v 10) that she is 'terrible as
an army with banners.' What can a divided army do, or a disordered
army, that have lost their banners, or, for fear or shame, thrown
them away? In like manner, what can Christians do for Christ, and
the enlarging his dominions in the world, in bringing men from
darkness to light, while themselves are divided and disordered?
Peace is, to Christians, as great rivers are to some cities, which,
besides other benefits and commodities, are natural fortifications,
by reason whereof those places are made impregnable; but when, by
the subtilty of an adversary or the folly of the citizens, these
waters come to be divided into little petty rivulets, how soon are
they assailed and taken! Thus it fares with churches; when once
the devil, or their own folly divides them, they will be so far
from resisting of him, that they will be soon subjected by him.

Peace is to churches as walls to cities; nay, unity hath defended
cities that had no walls. It was once demanded of Agesilaus why
Lacedemon had no walls; he answers, pointing back to the city,
that the concord of the citizens was the strength of the city. In
like manner, Christians are strong when united; then they are more
capable to resist temptation, and to succour such as are tempted.
When unity and peace is among the churches, then are they like a
walled town; and when peace is the church's walls, salvation will
be her bulwarks.

Plutarch tells us of one Silurus that had eighty sons, whom he
calls to him as he lay upon his death-bed, and gave them a sheaf
of arrows; thereby to signify, that if they lived in unity they
might do much; but, if they divided, they would come to nothing.
If Christians were all of one piece--if they were all but one
lump, or but one sheaf or bundle, how great are the things they
might do for Christ and his people in the world, whereas, otherwise,
they can do little but dishonour him, and offend his.

It is reported of the leviathan, that his strength is in his scales
(Job 41:15-17): 'His scales are his pride, shut up together, as
with a close seal. One is so near to another, that no air can come
between them. They are joined one to another, they stick together,
that they cannot be sundered.' If the church of God were united
like the scales of leviathan, it would not be every brain-sick
notion, nor angry speculation, that would cause their separation.

Solomon saith, Two are better than one, because if one fail, the
other may raise him; then surely twenty are better than two, and
an hundred are better than twenty, for the same reason--because
they are more capable to help one another. If ever Christians would
do any thing to raise up the fallen tabernacles of Jacob, and to
strengthen the weak, and comfort the feeble, and to fetch back
those that have gone astray, it must be by unity.

We read of the men of Babel (Gen 11:6), 'The Lord said, Behold the
people is one--And now nothing will be restrained from them which
they have imagined to do.'

We learn, by reason, what great things may be done in worldly
achievements where unity is. And shall not reason, assisted with
the motives of religion, teach us that unity among Christians may
enable them to enterprise greater things for Christ? Would not this
make Satan fall from heaven like lightning? For as unity built
literal Babel, it is unity that must pull down mystical Babel.
And, on the other hand, where divisions are, there is confusion;
by this means, a Babel hath been built in every age. It hath
been observed by a learned man, and I wish I could not say truly
observed, that there is most of Babel and confusion among those
that cry out most against it.

Would we have a hand to destroy Babylon, let us have a heart to
unite one among another.

Our English histories tell us, that after Austin the monk had been
some time in England, that he heard of some of the remains of the
British Christians, which he convened to a place, which Cambden, in
his Britannia, calls Austin's Oak. Here they met to consult about
matters of religion; but such was their division, by reason of
Austin's imposing spirit, that our stories tell us that synod was
only famous for this, that they only met, and did nothing. This
is the mischief of divisions, they hinder the doing of much good;
and if Christians that are divided be ever famous for any thing,
it will be that they have often met together, and talked of this
and the other thing, but they did nothing.

(4.) Where unity and peace is wanting, there the weak are wounded,
and the wicked are hardened. Unity may well be compared to precious
oil (Psa 133:2). It is the nature of oil to heal that which is
wounded, and to soften that which is hard. Those men that have
hardened themselves against God and his people, when they shall
behold unity and peace among them, will say, God is in them indeed;
and, on the other hand, are they not ready to say, when they see
you divided, that the devil is in you, that you cannot agree?

(5.) Divisions, and want of peace, keep those out of the church
that would come in; and cause many to go out that are in.

'The divisions of Christians (as a learned man observes) are a
scandal to the Jews, an opprobrium to the Gentiles, and an inlet
to atheism and infidelity.' Insomuch that our controversies about
religion, especially as they have been of late managed, have made
religion itself become a controversy. O, then, how good and pleasant
a thing is it for brethren to dwell together in unity! The peace
and unity that was among the primitive Christians drew others to
them. What hinders the conversion of the Jews, but the divisions
of Christians? Must I be a Christian, says the Jew? What Christian
must I be; of what sect must I be of? The Jews, as one observes,
glossing upon that text in Isaiah 11:6, where it is prophesied,
that the lion and the lamb shall lie down together, and that there
shall be none left to hurt nor destroy in all God's holy mountain;
they interpreting these sayings to signify the concord and peace
that shall be among the people that shall own the Messiah, do
from hence conclude that the Messiah is not yet come, because of
the contentions and divisions that are among those that profess
him; and the apostle saith (1 Cor 14:23), that if an unbeliever
should see their disorders, he would say they were mad; but where
unity and peace is, there the churches are multiplied. We read
(Acts 9;31) that when the churches had rest, they multiplied; and
(Acts 2:46,47) when the church was serving God 'with one accord,'
the Lord added to them 'daily such as should be saved.'

It is unity brings men into the church, and divisions keep them out.
It is reported of an Indian, passing by the house of a Christian,
and hearing them contending, being desired to turn in, he refused,
saying Habamach dwells there--meaning that the devil dwelt there;
but where unity and peace is, there God is; and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God. The apostle tells the Corinthians, that if
they walked orderly, even the unbeliever would hereby be enforced
to come and worship, and say, God was in them indeed; and we read
(Zech 8:23) of a time when ten men shall take hold of a Jew, and
say, 'We will go with you; for we have heard that God is with
you.'

And hence it is that Christ prays (John 17:21) that his disciples
might be one, as the Father and he were one, that the world might
believe the Father sent him. As if he should say, you may preach
me as long as you will, and to little purpose, if you are not at
peace and unity among yourselves. Such was the unity of Christians
in former days, that the intelligent heathen would say of them,
that though they had many bodies, yet they had but one soul. And
we read the same of them (Acts 4:32) that 'the multitude of them
that believed were of one heart and of one soul.'

And as the learned Stillingfleet observes, in his Irenicum,--'The
unity and peace that was then among Christians, made religion amiable
in the judgment of impartial heathens. Christians were then known
by the benignity and sweetness of their dispositions, by the candour
and ingenuity of their spirits, by their mutual love, forbearance,
and condescension to one another: but either this is not the
practice of Christianity,' viz., a duty that Christians are now
bound to observe, 'or else it is not calculated for our meridian,
where the spirits of men are of too high an elevation for it; for
if pride and uncharitableness, if divisions and strifes, if wrath
and envy, if animosities and contentions, were but the marks of
true Christians, Diogenes need never light his lamp at noon to
find out such among us; but if a spirit of meekness, gentleness,
and condescension; if a stooping to the weaknesses and infirmities
of one another; if pursuit after peace, when it flies from us, be
the indispensable duties and characteristical notes of Christians,
it may possibly prove a difficult inquest to find out such among
the crowds of those that shelter themselves under that glorious
name.'

It is the unity and peace of churches that brings others to them,
and makes Christianity amiable. What is prophesied of the church
of the Jews, may in this case be applied to the Gentile church
(Isa 66:12) that when once God extends peace to her like a river,
the Gentiles shall come in like a flowing stream; then, and not
till then, the glory of the Lord shall arise upon his churches,
and his glory shall be seen among them; then shall their hearts
fear and be enlarged, because the abundance of the nations shall
be converted to them.

(6.) As want of unity and peace keeps those out of the church that
would come in, so it hinders the growth of those that are in. Jars
and divisions, wranglings and prejudices, eat out the growth, if
not the life, of religion. These are those waters of Marah that
embitter our spirits, and quench the Spirit of God. Unity and peace
is said to be like the dew of Hermon, and as a dew that descended
upon Zion, where the Lord commanded his blessing (Psa 133:3).

Divisions run religion into briers and thorns, contentions and
parties. Divisions are to churches like wars in countries. Where
war is, the ground lieth waste and untilled; none takes care of
it. It is love that edifieth, but division pulleth down. Divisions
are, as the northeast wind to the fruits, which causeth them to
dwindle away to nothing; but when the storms are over, every thing
begins to grow. When men are divided, they seldom speak the truth
in love; and then, no marvel they grow not up to him in all things,
which is the head.

It is a sad presage of an approaching famine, as one well observes,
not of bread nor water, but of hearing the Word of God; when the
thin ears of corn devour the plump full ones; when the lean kine
devour the fat ones; when our controversies about doubtful things,
and things of less moment, eat up our zeal for the more indisputable
and practical things in religion; which may give us cause to fear
that this will be the character by which our age will be known to
posterity, that it was the age that talked of religion most and
loved it least.

Look upon those churches where peace is, and there you shall
find prosperity. When the churches had rest, they were not only
multiplied, but, walking in the fear of the Lord, and the comforts
of the Holy Ghost, they were edified; it is when the whole body
is knit together, as with joints and bands, that they increase
with the increase of God.

We are at a stand sometimes why there is so little growth among
churches; why men have been so long in learning, and are yet so
far from attaining the knowledge of the truth. Some have given one
reason, and some another; some say pride is the cause, and others
say covetousness is the cause; I wish I could say these were no
causes. But I observe that when God entered his controversy with his
people of old, he mainly insisted upon some one sin, as idolatry,
and shedding innocent blood, &c., as comprehensive of the rest;
not but that they were guilty of other sins, but those that were
the most capital are particularly insisted on; in like manner, whoever
would but take a review of churches that live in contentions and
divisions, may easily find that breach of unity and charity is
their capital sin, and the occasion of all other sins. No marvel,
then, that the Scripture saith the whole law is fulfilled in love;
and if so, then, where love is wanting, it must needs follow the
whole law is broken. It is where love grows cold that sin abounds;
and therefore the want of unity and peace is the cause of that
leanness and barrenness that is among us: it is true in spirituals
as well as temporals, that peace brings plenty.

(7.) Where unity and peace is wanting, our prayers are hindered.
The promise is, that what we shall agree to ask shall be given us
of our heavenly Father. No marvel we pray and pray, and yet are
not answered; it is because we are not agreed what to have.

It is reported that the people in Lacedemonia, coming to make
supplications to their idol-god, some of them asked for rain, and
others of them asked for fair weather; the oracle returns them
this answer, That they should go first and agree among themselves.
Would a heathen god refuse to answer such prayers in which the
supplicants were not agreed; and shall we think the true God will
answer them?

We see, then, that divisions hinder our prayers, and lay a prohibition
on our sacrifice. 'If thou bring thy gift to the altar,' saith
Christ, 'and there remeberest that thy brother hath ought against
thee; leave there thy gift--and go--and first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer it' (Matt 5:24). So that want of
unity and charity hinders even our particular prayers and devotions.

This hindered the prayers and fastings of the people of old from
finding acceptance (Isa 58:3); the people ask the reason wherefore
they fasted, and God did not see, nor take notice of them. He gives
this reason, because they fasted for strife and debate, and hid
their face from their own flesh. Again (Isa 59), the Lord saith,
His hand was not shortened, that he could not save; nor his
ear heavy, that he could not hear: but their sins had separated
between their God and them. And among those many sins they stood
chargeable with, this was none of the least, viz., that the way
of peace they had not known. You see where peace was wanting,
prayers were hindered, both under the Old and New Testament.

The sacrifice of the people in Isaiah 65, that said, Stand farther
off, I am holier than thou, was as smoke in the nostrils of the
Lord. On the other hand, we read how acceptable those prayers were
that were made 'with one accord' (Acts 4:24, compared with verse
31). They prayed with one accord, and they were all of one heart
and of one soul. And see the benefit of it; 'they were all filled
with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the Word with boldness': which
was the very thing they prayed for, as appears (v 29). And the
apostle exhorts the husband to dwell with his wife, that their
prayers might not be hindered (1 Peter 3:7). We see, then, want
of unity and peace, either in families or churches, is a hindrance
of prayers.

(8.) It is a dishonour and disparagement to Christ that his family
should be divided. When an army falls into mutiny and division, it
reflects disparagement on him that hath the conduct of it. In like
manner, the divisions of families are a dishonour to the heads and
those that govern them. And if so, then how greatly do we dishonour
our Lord and Governor, who gave his body to be broken, to keep
his church from breaking, who prayed for their peace and unity,
and left peace at his departing from them for a legacy, even a
peace which the world could not bestow upon them.

(9.) Where there is peace and unity, there is a sympathy with each
other; that which is the want of one will be the want of all,--Who
is afflicted, saith the apostle, and I burn not?[1] we should then
remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which
suffer adversity, as being ourselves also of the body (Heb 13:3).
But where the body is broken, or men are not reckoned or esteemed
of the body, no marvel we are so little affected with such as are
afflicted. Where divisions are, that which is the joy of the one
is the grief of another; but where unity, and peace, and charity
abounds, there we shall find Christians in mourning with them that
mourn, and rejoicing with them that rejoice; then they will not
envy the prosperity of others, nor secretly rejoice at the miseries
or miscarriages of any.

Fourth, Last of all, I now come to give you twelve directions and
motives for the obtaining peace and unity.

If ever we would live in peace and unity, we must pray for it. We
are required to seek peace: of whom, then, can we seek it with
expectation to find it, but of him who is a God of peace, and
hath promised to bless his people with peace? It is God that hath
promised to give his people one heart, and one way; yet for all
these things he will be sought unto. O then let us seek peace, and
pray for peace, because God shall prosper them that love it.

The peace of churches is that which the apostle prays for in all
his epistles; in which his desire is, that grace and peace may be
multiplied and increased among them.

1. They that would endeavour the peace of the churches, must be
careful who they commit the care and oversight of the churches to;
as, first, over and besides those qualifications that should be in
all Christians, they that rule the church of God should be men of
counsel and understanding; where there is an ignorant ministry,
there is commonly an ignorant people,--according as it was of old,
Like priest, like people.

How sad is it to see the church of God committed to the care of
such that pretend to be teachers of others, that understand not what
they say, or whereof they affirm. No marvel the peace of churches
is broken, when their watchmen want skill to preserve their unity,
which of all other things is as the church's walls; when they are
divided, no wonder they crumble to atoms, if there is no skilful
physician to heal them. It is sad when there is no balm in Gilead,
and when there is no physician there. Hence it is, that the wounds
of churches become incurable, like the wounds of God's people of
old; either not healed at all, or else slightly healed, and to no
purpose. May it not be said of many churches at this day, as God
said of the church of Israel, that he sought for a man among them
that should stand in the gap, and make up the breach, but he found
none?

Remember what was said of old (Mal 2:7), The priest's lips should
preserve knowledge; and the people 'should seek the law at his
mouth.' But when this is wanting, the people will be stumbling and
departing from God and one another; therefore God complains (Hosea
4:6) that his people were 'destroyed for want of knowledge'; that
is, for want of knowing guides; for if the light that is in them
that teach be darkness, how great is that darkness; and if the
blind lead the blind, no marvel both fall into the ditch.

How many are there that take upon them to teach others, that
had need be taught in the beginning of religion; that instead
of multiplying knowledge, multiply words without knowledge; and
instead of making known God's counsel, darken counsel by words
without knowledge? The apostle speaks of some that did more than
darken counsel, for they wrested the counsel of God (2 Peter
3:16). In Paul's epistles, saith he, are 'some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as
they do also the other scriptures unto their own destruction.'
Some things in the Scripture are hard to be known, and they are
made harder by such unlearned teachers as utter their own notions
by words without knowledge.

None are more bold and adventurous to take upon them to expound
the dark mysteries and sayings of the prophets and revelations, and
the 9th of the Romans,--which, I believe, contains some of those
many things which, in Paul's epistles, Peter saith were 'hard
to be understood.' I say, none are more forward to dig in these
mines than those that can hardly give a sound reason for the
first principles of religion; and such as are ignorant of many
more weighty things that are easily to be seen in the face and
superficies of the Scripture; nothing will serve these but swimming
in the deeps, when they have not yet learned to wade through the
shallows of the Scriptures. Like the Gnostics of old, who thought
they knew all things, though they knew nothing as they ought to
know. And as those Gnostics did of old, so do such teachers of late
break the unity and peace of churches. How needful, then, is it,
that if we desire the peace of churches, that we choose out men
of knowledge, who may be able to keep them from being shattered
and scattered with every wind of doctrine; and who may be able to
convince and stop the mouths of gainsayers!

2. You must not only choose men of counsel; but if you would design
the unity and peace of the churches, you must choose men of courage
to govern them; for as there must be wisdom to bear with some, so
there must be courage to correct others; as some must be instructed
meekly, so others must be rebuked sharply, that they may be sound
in the faith; there must be wisdom to rebuke some with long-suffering,
and there must be courage to suppress and stop the mouths of others.
The apostle tells Titus of some 'whose mouths must be stopped,'
or else they would 'subvert whole houses' (Titus 1:11). Where
this courage hath been wanting, not only whole houses, but whole
churches have been subverted. And Paul tells the Galatians, that
when he saw some endeavour to bring the churches into bondage,
that he did not give place to them, 'no, not for an hour,' &c.
(Gal 2:5). If this course had been taken by the rulers of churches,
their peace had not been so often invaded by unruly and vain
talkers.

In choosing men to rule, if you would endeavour to keep the unity
of the spirit and the bond of peace thereby, be careful you choose
men of peaceable dispositions. That which hath much annoyed the
peace of churches, hath been the froward and perverse spirits
of the rulers thereof. Solomon therefore adviseth, that 'with a
furious man we should not go, lest we learn his ways, and get a
snare to our souls' (Prov 22:24,25). And with the froward we learn
frowardness. How do some men's words eat like a canker; who instead
of lifting up their voices like a trumpet, to sound a parley for
peace, have rather sounded an alarm to war and contention. If ever
we would live in peace, let us reverence the feet of them that
bring the glad tidings of it.

O how have some men made it their business to preach contentions,
and upon their entertainment of every novel opinion, to preach
separation! How hath God's Word been stretched and torn, to furnish
these men with arguments to tear churches! Have not our ears heard
those texts that saith, 'Come out from among them, and be separate,'
&c.; and, 'Withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly?' I
say, have we not heard these texts, that were written to prevent
disorder, brought to countenance the greatest disorder that ever
was in the church of God, even schism and division? whereas one
of these exhortations was written to the church of Corinth, to
separate themselves from the idol's temple, and the idol's table,
in which many of them lived in the participation of, notwithstanding
their profession of the true God, as appears 2 Corinthians 6:16,
17, compared with 1 Corinthians 8:7, and 1 Corinthians 10:14, 20,
22 recites: and not for some few or more members, who shall make
themselves both judges and parties, to make separation, when and
as often was they please, from the whole congregation and church
of God where they stood related; for by the same rule, and upon
the same ground, may others start some new question among these new
separatists, and become their own judges of the communicableness
of them, and thereupon make another separation from these, till
at last two be not left to walk together. And for that other text
mentioned (2 Thess 3:6) where Paul exhorts the church of Thessalonica
to withdraw themselves from every brother that walks disorderly,
I cannot but wonder that any should bring this to justify their
separation, or withdrawing from the communion of a true, though a
disorderly, church. For,

(1.) Consider that this was not writ for a few members to withdraw
from the church, but for the church to withdraw from disorderly
members.

(2.) Consider that if any offended members, upon pretence of
error, either in doctrine or practice, should by this text become
judges, as well as parties, of the grounds and lawfulness of
their separation, then it will follow, that half a score notorious
heretics, or scandalous livers, when they have walked so as they
foresee the church are ready to deal with them, and withdraw from
them, shall anticipate the church, and pretend somewhat against
them, of which themselves must be judges, and so withdraw from the
church, pretending either heresy or disorder; and so condemn the
church, to prevent the disgrace of being condemned by the church.
How needful, then, is it that men of peaceable dispositions, and
not of froward and factious and dividing spirits, be chosen to
rule the church of God, for fear lest the whole church be leavened
and soured by them.

4. As there must be care used in choosing men to rule the church
of God, so there must be a consideration had that there are many
things darkly laid down in Scripture; this will temper our spirits,
and make us live in peace and unity the more firmly in things in
which we agree; this will help us to bear one another's burden, and
so fulfil the law of Christ, inasmuch as all things necessary to
salvation and church-communion are plainly laid down in Scripture.
And where things are more darkly laid down, we should consider
that God intended hereby to stir up our diligence, that thereby
we might increase our knowledge, and not our divisions; for it may
be said of all discoveries of truth we have made in the Scriptures,
as it is said of the globe of the earth, that though men have
made great searches, and thereupon great discoveries, yet there
is still a terra incognita--an unknown land; so there is in the
Scriptures; for after men have travelled over them, one age after
another, yet still there is, as it were, a terra incognita, an
unknown tract to put us upon farther search and inquiry, and to
keep us from censuring and falling out with those who have not yet
made the same discoveries; that so we may say with the Psalmist,
when we reflect upon our short apprehensions of the mind of God,
that we have seen an end of all perfections, but God's commands are
exceeding broad; and as one observes, speaking of the Scriptures,
that there is a path in them leading to the mind of God, which lieth
a great distance from the thoughts and apprehensions of men. And
on the other hand, in many other places, God sits, as it were, on
the superficies and the face of the letter, where he that runs may
discern him speaking plainly, and no parable at all. How should the
consideration of this induce us to a peaceable deportment towards
those that differ.

5. If we would endeavour peace and unity, we must consider how God
hath tempered the body, that so the comely parts should not separate
from the uncomely, as having no need of them (1 Cor 12:22-25).
There is in Christ's body and house some members and vessels less
honourable (2 Tim 2:20); and therefore we should not, as some
now-a-days do, pour the more abundant disgrace, instead of putting
the more abundant honour, upon them. Did we but consider this,
we should be covering the weakness and hiding the miscarriages of
one another, because we are all members one of another, and the
most useless member in his place is useful.

6. If we would live in peace, let us remember our relations to
God--as children to a father, and to each other as brethren. Will
not the thoughts that we have one Father quiet us, and the thoughts
that we are brethren unite us? It was this that made Abraham
propose terms of peace to Lot (Gen 13): 'Let there be no strife,'
saith he, 'between us, for we are brethren.' And we read of Moses,
in Acts 7:26, using this argument to reconcile those that strove
together, and to set them at one again: 'Sirs,' saith he, 'ye are
brethren; why do ye wrong one to another?' A deep sense of this
relation, that we are brethren, would keep us from dividing.

7. If we would preserve peace, let us mind the gifts, and graces,
and virtues that are in each other; let these be more in our eye
than their failings and imperfections. When the apostle exhorted
the Philippians to peace, as a means hereunto, that so the peace
of God might rule in their hearts, he tells them (4:8), that if
there were any virtue, or any praise, they should think of these
things. While we are always talking and blazoning the faults of
one another, and spreading their infirmities, no marvel we are so
little in peace and charity; for as charity covereth a multitude
of sins, so malice covereth a multitude of virtues, and makes us
deal by one another as the heathen persecutors dealt with Christians,
viz., put them in bears' skins, that they might the more readily
become a prey to those dogs that were designed to devour them.

8. If we would keep unity and peace, let us lay aside provoking
and dividing language, and forgive those that use them. Remember
that old saying, Evil words corrupt good manners. When men think to
carry all afore them, with speaking uncharitably and disgracefully
of their brethren or their opinions, may not such be answered as
Job answered his unfriendly visitants (Job 6:25), 'How forcible
are right words! But what doth your arguing reprove?' How healing
are words fitly spoken! A word in season, how good is it! If we
would seek peace, let us clothe all our treaties for peace with
acceptable words; and where one word may better accommodate than
another, let that be used to express persons or things by, and let
us not, as some do, call the different practices of our brethren
will-worship, and their different opinions doctrines of devils,
and the doctrine of Balaam, who taught fornication, &c., unless
we can plainly, and in expressness of terms, prove it so; such
language as this hath strangely divided our spirits, and hardened
our hearts one towards another.

9. If we would live in peace, let us make the best constructions of
one another's words and actions. Charity judgeth the best, and it
thinks no evil; if words and actions may be construed to a good sense,
let us never put a bad construction upon them. How much hath the
peace of Christians been broken by an uncharitable interpretation
of words and actions? As some lay to the charge of others that
which they never said, so, by straining men's words, others lay
to their charge that they never thought.

10. Be willing to hear and learn, and obey those that God by his
providence hath set over you; this is a great means to preserve
the unity and peace of churches. But when men, yea, and sometimes
women, shall usurp authority, and think themselves wiser than
their teachers, no wonder if these people run into contentions and
parties, when any shall say they are not free to hear those whom
the church thinks fit to speak to them. This is the first step to
schism, and is usually attended, if not timely prevented, with a
sinful separation.

11. If you would keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, be mindful that the God whom you serve is a God of peace,
and your Saviour is a Prince of peace, and that his ways are ways
of pleasantness, and all his paths are peace; and that Christ was
sent into the world to give light to them that sit in darkness and
in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet in the way of peace.

12. Consider the oneness of spirit that is among the enemies of
religion; though they differ about other things, yet to persecute
religion, and extirpate religion out of the earth, here they will
agree: the devils in the air, and the devils in the earth, all the
devils in hell, and in the world, make one at this turn. Shall the
devil's kingdom be united, and shall Christ's be divided? Shall
the devils make one shoulder to drive on the design of damning
men, and shall not Christians unite to carry on the great design
of saving of them? Shall the Papists agree and unite to carry on
their interest, notwithstanding the multitudes of orders, degrees,
and differences, that are among them, and shall not those that
call themselves reformed churches unite to carry on the common
interest of Christ in the world, notwithstanding some petty and
disputable differences that are among them? Quarrels about religion,
as one observes, were sins not named among the Gentiles. What a
shame is it, then, for Christians to abound in them, especially
considering the nature of the Christian religion, and what large
provisions the author of it hath made to keep the professors of it
in peace; insomuch, as one well observes, it is next to a miracle
that ever any, especially the professors of it, should fall out
about it.

13. Consider and remember that the Judge stands at the door; let
this moderate our spirits, that the Lord is at hand. What a sad
account will they have to make when he comes, that shall be found
to smite their fellow-servants, and to make the way to his kingdom
more narrow than ever he made it? Let me close all in the words of
that great apostle (2 Cor 13:11): 'Finally, brethren, farewell. Be
perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and
the God of love and peace shall be with you.'

POSTSCRIPT.

Reader, I thought good to advertise thee that I have delivered this
to thy hand in the same order and method in which it was preached,
and almost in the same words, without any diminishings or considerable
enlargings, unless it be in the thirteen last particulars, upon
some of which I have made some enlargements, which I could not
then do for want of time; but the substance of every one of them
was then laid down in the same particular order as here thou hast
them: and now I have done, I make no other account, to use the
words of a moderate man upon the like occasion, but it will fall
out with me, as doth commonly with him that parts a fray, both
parties may perhaps drive at me for wishing them no worse than
peace. My ambition of the public tranquility of the church of
God, I hope, will carry me through these hazards. Let both beat
me, so their quarrels may cease; I shall rejoice in those blows
and scars I shall take for the church's safety.


FOOTNOTE:

[1] 'Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn
not?'--Ed.

***

MR. BUNYAN'S LAST SERMON:

Preached August 19TH, 1688



[ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR]

This sermon, although very short, is peculiarly interesting: how it
was preserved we are not told; but it bears strong marks of having
been published from notes taken by one of the hearers. There is
no proof that any memorandum or notes of this sermon was found in
the autograph of the preacher.

In the list of Bunyan's works published by Chas. Doe, at the end of
the 'Heavenly Footman,' March 1690, it stands No. 44. He professes
to give the title-page, word for word, as it was first printed,
It is, 'Mr. John Bunyan's last sermon, at London, preached at Mr.
Gamman's meeting-house, near Whitechapel, August 19th, 1688, upon
John 1:13: showing a resemblance between a natural and a spiritual
birth; and how every man and woman may try themselves, and know
whether they are born again or not.' Published 1689, in about one
sheet in 12mo. From this it appears to have been preached only two
days before his fatal illness, and twelve days before his decease,
which took place August 31st, 1688. The disease which terminated
his invaluable life, was brought on by a journey to Reading on
horseback, undertaken with the benevolent design of reconciling
an offended father to his son. Having accomplished his object, he
rode to London; on his way home, through a heavy rain, the effects
of which appeared soon after this, his last sermon was preached.
He bore, with most exemplary patience and resignation, the fever
which invaded his body; and, at a distance from his wife and
family, in the house of his friend Mr. Strudwick, at Snow Hill,
his pilgrimage was ended, and he fell asleep in perfect peace, to
awake amidst the harmonies and glory of the celestial city.

GEO. OFFOR.


Mr. Bunyan's Last Sermon


'Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of God.'--John 1:13

The words have a dependance on what goes before, and therefore
I must direct you to them for the right understanding of it. You
have it thus: 'He came unto his own, and his own received him not;
but as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: which were
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh--but of God.'

In the words before, you have two things. First, Some of his own
rejecting him, when he offered himself to them. Second, Others of
his own receiving him, and making him welcome; those that reject
him, he also passes by; but those that receive him, he gives them
power to become the sons of God.

Now, lest any one should look upon it as good luck or fortune, says
he, they 'were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God.' They that did not receive
him, they were only born of flesh and blood; but those that receive
him, they have God to their Father; they receive the doctrine of
Christ with a vehement desire.

[TO EXPLAIN THE TEXT.]

FIRST, I will show you what he means by blood. They that believe
are born to it, as an heir is to an inheritance--they are born of
God, not of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; not of blood,
that is, not by generation, not born to the kingdom of heaven by
the flesh, not because I am the son of a godly man or woman--that
is meant by blood (Acts 17:26); He 'hath made of one blood
all nations.' But when he says here, 'not of blood,' he rejects
all carnal privileges they did boast of: they boasted they were
Abraham's seed; no, no says he, it is not of blood; think not to
say you have Abraham to your father; you must be born of God, if
you go to the kingdom of heaven.

SECOND, 'Nor of the will of the flesh.' What must we understand
by that?

It is taken for those vehement inclinations that are in man, to
all manner of looseness, fulfilling the desires of the flesh: that
must not be understood here; men are not made the children of God
by fulfilling their lustful desires. It must be understood here
in the best sense: there is not only in carnal men a will to be
vile, but there is in them a will to be saved also; a will to go
to heaven also. But this it will not do; it will not privilege
a man in the things of the kingdom of God: natural desires after
the things of another world, they are not an argument to prove a
man shall go to heaven whenever he dies. I am not a free-willer,
I do abhor it; yet there is not the wickedest man but he desires,
some time or other, to be saved; he will read some time or other,
or, it may be, pray, but this will not do: 'It is not of him that
willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.'
There is willing and running, and yet to no purpose (Rom 9:16).
Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, have not
obtained it (v 30). Here, I do not understand, as if the apostle
had denied a virtuous course of life to be the way to heaven;
but that a man without grace, though he have natural gifts, yet
he shall not obtain privilege to go to heaven, and be the son of
God. Though a man without grace may have a will to be saved, yet
he cannot have that will God's way. Nature, it cannot know any
thing but the things of nature--the things of God knows no man
